Virgil - Wikipedia
Virgil
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to:					navigation, 					search
For other uses, see Virgil (disambiguation).
For the grammarian, see Virgilius Maro Grammaticus.
Virgil
Depiction of Virgil, 3rd century AD
("Monnus-Mosaic", Rheinisches Landesmuseum, Trier)
Born
Publius Vergilius Maro
October 15, 70 BC
Near Mantua, Cisalpine Gaul, Roman Republic
Died
September 21, 19 BC (age 50)
Brundisium, Italy, Roman Empire
Occupation
Poet
Nationality
Roman
Genre
Epic poetry, didactic poetry, pastoral poetry
Literary movement
Augustan poetry
Publius Vergilius Maro (Classical Latin: [ˈpuː.blɪ.ʊs wɛrˈɡɪ.lɪ.ʊs ˈma.roː]; traditional dates October 15, 70 BC – September 21, 19 BC[1]), usually called Virgil or Vergil /ˈvɜːrdʒᵻl/ in English, was an ancient Roman poet of the Augustan period. He wrote three of the most famous poems in Latin literature, the Eclogues (or Bucolics), the Georgics, and the epic Aeneid. A number of minor poems, collected in the Appendix Vergiliana, are sometimes attributed to him.[2][3]
Virgil is traditionally ranked as one of Rome's greatest poets. His Aeneid has been considered the national epic of ancient Rome from the time of its composition to the present day. Modeled after Homer's Iliad and Odyssey, the Aeneid follows the Trojan refugee Aeneas as he struggles to fulfill his destiny and reach Italy; where his descendants Romulus and Remus were to found the city of Rome. Virgil's work has had wide and deep influence on Western literature, most notably Dante's Divine Comedy, in which Virgil appears as Dante's guide through Hell and Purgatory.[4]
Contents
1 Life and works
1.1 Birth and biographical tradition
1.2 Early works
1.3 The Eclogues
1.4 The Georgics
1.5 The Aeneid
1.6 Reception of the Aeneid
1.7 Virgil's death and editing of the Aeneid
2 Later views and reception
2.1 In antiquity
2.2 Late antiquity and Middle Ages
2.3 Legends
2.4 Virgil's tomb
3 Spelling
4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links
Life and works[edit]
Birth and biographical tradition[edit]
A bust of Virgil in Naples
Virgil's biographical tradition is thought to depend on a lost biography by Varius, Virgil's editor, which was incorporated into the biography by Suetonius and the commentaries of Servius and Donatus, the two great commentators on Virgil's poetry. Although the commentaries no doubt record much factual information about Virgil, some of their evidence can be shown to rely on inferences made from his poetry and allegorizing; thus, Virgil's biographical tradition remains problematic.[5]
The tradition holds that Virgil was born in the village of Andes, near Mantua[6] in Cisalpine Gaul.[7] Analysis of his name has led to beliefs that he descended from earlier Roman colonists. Modern speculation ultimately is not supported by narrative evidence either from his own writings or his later biographers. Macrobius says that Virgil's father was of a humble background; however, scholars generally believe that Virgil was from an equestrian landowning family which could afford to give him an education. He attended schools in Cremona, Mediolanum, Rome and Naples. After considering briefly a career in rhetoric and law, the young Virgil turned his talents to poetry.[8]
Early works[edit]
Main article: Appendix Vergiliana
According to the commentators, Virgil received his first education when he was five years old and he later went to Cremona, Milan, and finally Rome to study rhetoric, medicine, and astronomy, which he soon abandoned for philosophy. From Virgil's admiring references to the neoteric writers Pollio and Cinna, it has been inferred that he was, for a time, associated with Catullus' neoteric circle. According to Servius, schoolmates considered Virgil extremely shy and reserved, and he was nicknamed "Parthenias" or "maiden" because of his social aloofness. Virgil also seems to have suffered bad health throughout his life and in some ways lived the life of an invalid. According to the Catalepton, he began to write poetry while in the Epicurean school of Siro the Epicurean at Naples. A group of small works attributed to the youthful Virgil by the commentators survive collected under the title Appendix Vergiliana, but are largely considered spurious by scholars. One, the Catalepton, consists of fourteen short poems,[9] some of which may be Virgil's, and another, a short narrative poem titled the Culex ("The Gnat"), was attributed to Virgil as early as the 1st century AD.
The Eclogues[edit]
Main article: Eclogues
Page from the beginning of the Eclogues in the 5th-century Vergilius Romanus
The biographical tradition asserts that Virgil began the hexameter Eclogues (or Bucolics) in 42 BC and it is thought that the collection was published around 39–38 BC, although this is controversial.[9] The Eclogues (from the Greek for "selections") are a group of ten poems roughly modeled on the bucolic hexameter poetry ("pastoral poetry") of the Hellenistic poet Theocritus. After his victory in the Battle of Philippi in 42 BC, fought against the army led by the assassins of Julius Caesar, Octavian tried to pay off his veterans with land expropriated from towns in northern Italy, supposedly including, according to the tradition, an estate near Mantua belonging to Virgil. The loss of his family farm and the attempt through poetic petitions to regain his property have traditionally been seen as Virgil's motives in the composition of the Eclogues. This is now thought to be an unsupported inference from interpretations of the Eclogues. In Eclogues 1 and 9, Virgil indeed dramatizes the contrasting feelings caused by the brutality of the land expropriations through pastoral idiom, but offers no indisputable evidence of the supposed biographic incident. While some readers have identified the poet himself with various characters and their vicissitudes, whether gratitude by an old rustic to a new god (Ecl. 1), frustrated love by a rustic singer for a distant boy (his master's pet, Ecl. 2), or a master singer's claim to have composed several eclogues (Ecl. 5), modern scholars largely reject such efforts to garner biographical details from works of fiction, preferring to interpret an author's characters and themes as illustrations of contemporary life and thought. The ten Eclogues present traditional pastoral themes with a fresh perspective. Eclogues 1 and 9 address the land confiscations and their effects on the Italian countryside. 2 and 3 are pastoral and erotic, discussing both homosexual love (Ecl. 2) and attraction toward people of any gender (Ecl. 3). Eclogue 4, addressed to Asinius Pollio, the so-called "Messianic Eclogue" uses the imagery of the golden age in connection with the birth of a child (who the child was meant to be has been subject to debate). 5 and 8 describe the myth of Daphnis in a song contest, 6, the cosmic and mythological song of Silenus; 7, a heated poetic contest, and 10 the sufferings of the contemporary elegiac poet Cornelius Gallus. Virgil is credited[by whom?] in the Eclogues with establishing Arcadia as a poetic ideal that still resonates in Western literature and visual arts and setting the stage for the development of Latin pastoral by Calpurnius Siculus, Nemesianus, and later writers.
The Georgics[edit]
Main article: Georgics
Sometime after the publication of the Eclogues (probably before 37 BC),[10] Virgil became part of the circle of Maecenas, Octavian's capable agent d'affaires who sought to counter sympathy for Antony among the leading families by rallying Roman literary figures to Octavian's side. Virgil came to know many of the other leading literary figures of the time, including Horace, in whose poetry he is often mentioned,[11] and Varius Rufus, who later helped finish the Aeneid.
Late 17th-century illustration of a passage from the Georgics by Jerzy Siemiginowski-Eleuter
At Maecenas' insistence (according to the tradition) Virgil spent the ensuing years (perhaps 37–29 BC) on the long didactic hexameter poem called the Georgics (from Greek, "On Working the Earth") which he dedicated to Maecenas. The ostensible theme of the Georgics is instruction in the methods of running a farm. In handling this theme, Virgil follows in the didactic ("how to") tradition of the Greek poet Hesiod's Works and Days and several works of the later Hellenistic poets. The four books of the Georgics focus respectively on raising crops and trees (1 and 2), livestock and horses (3), and beekeeping and the qualities of bees (4). Well-known passages include the beloved Laus Italiae of Book 2, the prologue description of the temple in Book 3, and the description of the plague at the end of Book 3. Book 4 concludes with a long mythological narrative, in the form of an epyllion which describes vividly the discovery of beekeeping by Aristaeus and the story of Orpheus' journey to the underworld. Ancient scholars, such as Servius, conjectured that the Aristaeus episode replaced, at the emperor's request, a long section in praise of Virgil's friend, the poet Gallus, who was disgraced by Augustus, and who committed suicide in 26 BC.
The Georgics' tone wavers between optimism and pessimism, sparking critical debate on the poet's intentions,[12] but the work lays the foundations for later didactic poetry. Virgil and Maecenas are said to have taken turns reading the Georgics to Octavian upon his return from defeating Antony and Cleopatra at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC.
The Aeneid[edit]
Main article: Aeneid
A 1st-century terracotta expressing the pietas of Aeneas, who carries his aged father and leads his young son
The Aeneid is widely considered Virgil's finest work and one of the most important poems in the history of western literature. Virgil worked on the Aeneid during the last eleven years of his life (29–19 BC), commissioned, according to Propertius, by Augustus.[13] The epic poem consists of 12 books in dactylic hexameter verse which describe the journey of Aeneas, a warrior fleeing the sack of Troy, to Italy, his battle with the Italian prince Turnus, and the foundation of a city from which Rome would emerge. The Aeneid's first six books describe the journey of Aeneas from Troy to Rome. Virgil made use of several models in the composition of his epic;[10] Homer, the preeminent author of classical epic, is everywhere present, but Virgil also makes special use of the Latin poet Ennius and the Hellenistic poet Apollonius of Rhodes among the various other writers to which he alludes. Although the Aeneid casts itself firmly into the epic mode, it often seeks to expand the genre by including elements of other genres such as tragedy and aetiological poetry. Ancient commentators noted that Virgil seems to divide the Aeneid into two sections based on the poetry of Homer; the first six books were viewed as employing the Odyssey as a model while the last six were connected to the Iliad.[14]
Book 1[15] (at the head of the Odyssean section) opens with a storm which Juno, Aeneas' enemy throughout the poem, stirs up against the fleet. The storm drives the hero to the coast of Carthage, which historically was Rome's deadliest foe. The queen, Dido, welcomes the ancestor of the Romans, and under the influence of the gods falls deeply in love with him. At a banquet in Book 2, Aeneas tells the story of the sack of Troy, the death of his wife, and his escape, to the enthralled Carthaginians, while in Book 3 he recounts to them his wanderings over the Mediterranean in search of a suitable new home. Jupiter in Book 4 recalls the lingering Aeneas to his duty to found a new city, and he slips away from Carthage, leaving Dido to commit suicide, cursing Aeneas and calling down revenge in a symbolic anticipation of the fierce wars between Carthage and Rome. In Book 5, Aeneas' father Anchises dies and funeral games are celebrated for him. On reaching Cumae, in Italy in Book 6, Aeneas consults the Cumaean Sibyl, who conducts him through the Underworld where Aeneas meets the dead Anchises who reveals Rome's destiny to his son.
Book 7 (beginning the Iliadic half) opens with an address to the muse and recounts Aeneas' arrival in Italy and betrothal to Lavinia, daughter of King Latinus. Lavinia had already been promised to Turnus, the king of the Rutulians, who is roused to war by the Fury Allecto, and Amata Lavinia's mother. In Book 8, Aeneas allies with King Evander, who occupies the future site of Rome, and is given new armor and a shield depicting Roman history. Book 9 records an assault by Nisus and Euryalus on the Rutulians, Book 10, the death of Evander's young son Pallas, and 11 the death of the Volscian warrior princess Camilla and the decision to settle the war with a duel between Aeneas and Turnus. The Aeneid ends in Book 12 with the taking of Latinus' city, the death of Amata, and Aeneas' defeat and killing of Turnus, whose pleas for mercy are spurned. The final book ends with the image of Turnus' soul lamenting as it flees to the underworld.
Reception of the Aeneid[edit]
Virgil Reading the Aeneid to Augustus, Octavia, and Livia by Jean-Baptiste Wicar, Art Institute of Chicago
Critics of the Aeneid focus on a variety of issues.[16] The tone of the poem as a whole is a particular matter of debate; some see the poem as ultimately pessimistic and politically subversive to the Augustan regime, while others view it as a celebration of the new imperial dynasty. Virgil makes use of the symbolism of the Augustan regime, and some scholars see strong associations between Augustus and Aeneas, the one as founder and the other as re-founder of Rome. A strong teleology, or drive towards a climax, has been detected in the poem. The Aeneid is full of prophecies about the future of Rome, the deeds of Augustus, his ancestors, and famous Romans, and the Carthaginian Wars; the shield of Aeneas even depicts Augustus' victory at Actium against Mark Antony and Cleopatra VII in 31 BC. A further focus of study is the character of Aeneas. As the protagonist of the poem, Aeneas seems to waver constantly between his emotions and commitment to his prophetic duty to found Rome; critics note the breakdown of Aeneas' emotional control in the last sections of the poem where the "pious" and "righteous" Aeneas mercilessly slaughters Turnus.
The Aeneid appears to have been a great success. Virgil is said to have recited Books 2, 4, and 6 to Augustus;[10] and Book 6 apparently caused Augustus' sister Octavia to faint. Although the truth of this claim is subject to scholarly scepticism, it has served as a basis for later art, such as Jean-Baptiste Wicar's Virgil Reading the Aeneid.
Unfortunately, some lines of the poem were left unfinished, and the whole was unedited, at Virgil's death in 19 BC.
Virgil's death and editing of the Aeneid[edit]
According to the tradition, Virgil traveled to Greece in about 19 BC to revise the Aeneid. After meeting Augustus in Athens and deciding to return home, Virgil caught a fever while visiting a town near Megara. After crossing to Italy by ship, weakened with disease, Virgil died in Brundisium harbor on September 21, 19 BC. Augustus ordered Virgil's literary executors, Lucius Varius Rufus and Plotius Tucca, to disregard Virgil's own wish that the poem be burned, instead ordering it published with as few editorial changes as possible.[17] As a result, the text of the Aeneid that exists may contain faults which Virgil was planning to correct before publication. However, the only obvious imperfections are a few lines of verse that are metrically unfinished (i.e. not a complete line of dactylic hexameter). Some scholars have argued that Virgil deliberately left these metrically incomplete lines for dramatic effect.[18] Other alleged imperfections are subject to scholarly debate.
Later views and reception[edit]
In antiquity[edit]
A 3rd-century Tunisian mosaic of Virgil seated between Clio and Melpomene (from Hadrumetum [Sousse])
The works of Virgil almost from the moment of their publication revolutionized Latin poetry. The Eclogues, Georgics, and above all the Aeneid became standard texts in school curricula with which all educated Romans were familiar. Poets following Virgil often refer intertextually to his works to generate meaning in their own poetry. The Augustan poet Ovid parodies the opening lines of the Aeneid in Amores 1.1.1–2, and his summary of the Aeneas story in Book 14 of the Metamorphoses, the so-called "mini-Aeneid", has been viewed as a particularly important example of post-Virgilian response to the epic genre. Lucan's epic, the Bellum Civile has been considered an anti-Virgilian epic, disposing with the divine mechanism, treating historical events, and diverging drastically from Virgilian epic practice. The Flavian poet Statius in his 12-book epic Thebaid engages closely with the poetry of Virgil; in his epilogue he advises his poem not to "rival the divine Aeneid, but follow afar and ever venerate its footsteps."[19] In Silius Italicus, Virgil finds one of his most ardent admirers. With almost every line of his epic Punica Silius references Virgil. Indeed, Silius is known to have bought Virgil's tomb and worshipped the poet.[20] Partially as a result of his so-called "Messianic" Fourth Eclogue—widely interpreted later to have predicted the birth of Jesus Christ—Virgil was in later antiquity imputed to have the magical abilities of a seer; the Sortes Vergilianae, the process of using Virgil's poetry as a tool of divination, is found in the time of Hadrian, and continued into the Middle Ages. In a similar vein Macrobius in the Saturnalia credits the work of Virgil as the embodiment of human knowledge and experience, mirroring the Greek conception of Homer.[21] Virgil also found commentators in antiquity. Servius, a commentator of the 4th century AD, based his work on the commentary of Donatus. Servius' commentary provides us with a great deal of information about Virgil's life, sources, and references; however, many modern scholars find the variable quality of his work and the often simplistic interpretations frustrating.
Late antiquity and Middle Ages[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
A 5th-century portrait of Virgil from the Vergilius Romanus
Even as the Western Roman empire collapsed, literate men acknowledged that Virgil was a master poet. Gregory of Tours read Virgil, whom he quotes in several places, along with some other Latin poets, though he cautions that "we ought not to relate their lying fables, lest we fall under sentence of eternal death."
Dante made Virgil his guide in Hell and the greater part of Purgatory in The Divine Comedy. Dante also mentions Virgil in De vulgari eloquentia, along with Ovid, Lucan and Statius, as one of the four regulati poetae (ii, vi, 7).
The best-known surviving manuscripts of Virgil's works include the Vergilius Augusteus, the Vergilius Vaticanus and the Vergilius Romanus.
Legends[edit]
Virgil in his Basket, Lucas van Leyden, 1525
In the Middle Ages, Virgil's reputation was such that it inspired legends associating him with magic and prophecy. From at least the 3rd century, Christian thinkers interpreted Eclogues 4, which describes the birth of a boy ushering in a golden age, as a prediction of Jesus' birth. In consequence, Virgil came to be seen on a similar level to the Hebrew prophets of the Bible as one who had heralded Christianity.[22]
Possibly as early as the second century AD, Virgil's works were seen as having magical properties and were used for divination. In what became known as the Sortes Vergilianae (Virgilian Lots), passages would be selected at random and interpreted to answer questions.[23] In the 12th century, starting around Naples but eventually spreading widely throughout Europe, a tradition developed in which Virgil was regarded as a great magician. Legends about Virgil and his magical powers remained popular for over two hundred years, arguably becoming as prominent as his writings themselves.[24] Virgil's legacy in medieval Wales was such that the Welsh version of his name, Fferyllt or Pheryllt, became a generic term for magic-worker, and survives in the modern Welsh word for pharmacist, fferyllydd.[25]
The legend of "Virgil in his basket" arose in the Middle Ages, and is often seen in art and mentioned in literature as part of the Power of Women literary topos, demonstrating the disruptive force of female attractiveness on men. In this story Virgil became enamoured of a beautiful woman, sometimes described as the emperor's daughter or mistress and called Lucretia. She played him along and agreed to an assignation at her house, which he was to sneak into at night by climbing into a large basket let down from a window. When he did so he was only hoisted halfway up the wall and then left him trapped there into the next day, exposed to public ridicule. The story paralleled that of Phyllis riding Aristotle. Among other artists depicting the scene, Lucas van Leyden made a woodcut and later an engraving.[26]
Virgil's tomb[edit]
The verse inscription at Virgil's tomb was supposedly composed by the poet himself: Mantua me genuit, Calabri rapuere, tenet nunc Parthenope. Cecini pascua, rura, duces. ("Mantua gave me life, the Calabrians took it away, Naples holds me now; I sang of pastures, farms, and commanders." [trans. Bernard Knox])
The structure known as "Virgil's tomb" is found at the entrance of an ancient Roman tunnel (also known as "grotta vecchia") in Piedigrotta, a district two miles from the centre of Naples, near the Mergellina harbor, on the road heading north along the coast to Pozzuoli. While Virgil was already the object of literary admiration and veneration before his death, in the Middle Ages his name became associated with miraculous powers, and for a couple of centuries his tomb was the destination of pilgrimages and veneration.[27]
Spelling[edit]
By the fourth or fifth century A.D. the original spelling Vergilius had been corrupted to Virgilius, and then the latter spelling spread to the modern European languages.[28] The error probably originated with scribes reproducing manuscripts by dictation. The error persisted even though, as early as the 15th century, the classical scholar Poliziano had shown Vergilius to be the original spelling.[29] Today, the anglicisations Vergil and Virgil are both acceptable.[30]
References[edit]
^ Jones, Peter. Reading Virgil: AeneidI and II. Cambridge University Press. pp. 1, 4. ISBN 9780521768665. Retrieved 23 November 2016. 
^ Bunson, Matthew. Encyclopedia of the Roman Empire. Infobase Publishing. p. 584. ISBN 9781438110271. Retrieved 23 November 2016. 
^ Roberts, John. The Oxford Dictionary of the Classical World. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780192801463. Retrieved 23 November 2016. 
^ Ruud, Jay. Critical Companion to Dante. Infobase Publishing. p. 376. ISBN 9781438108414. Retrieved 23 November 2016. 
^ Don Fowler "Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro)" in The Oxford Classical Dictionary, (3.ed. 1996, Oxford), pg.1602
^ The epitaph on his tomb in Posilipo near Naples was Mantua me genuit; Calabri rapuere; tenet nunc Parthenope. Cecini pascua, rura, duces ("Mantua gave birth to me, the Calabrians took me, now Naples holds me; I sang of pastures [the Eclogues], country [the Georgics] and leaders [the Aeneid]").
^ Map of Cisalpine Gaul
^ http://www.usu.edu/markdamen/1320AncLit/chapters/11verg.htm
^ a b Fowler, pg.1602
^ a b c Fowler , pg.1603
^ Horace, Satires 1.5, 1.6, and Odes 1.3
^ Fowler, pg.1605
^ Avery, W. T. (1957). "Augustus and the "Aeneid"". The Classical Journal. 52 (5): 225–229. 
^ Jenkyns, p. 53
^ For a succinct summary, see Globalnet.co.uk
^ For a bibliography and summary see Fowler, pg.1605–6
^ Sellar, William Young; Glover, Terrot Reaveley (1911). "Virgil". Encyclopædia Britannica. 28 (11th ed.). p. 112. Retrieved 2012-06-07. 
^ Miller, F. J. (1909). "Evidences of Incompleteness in the "Aeneid" of Vergil". The Classical Journal. 4 (11th ed.). p. 343. Retrieved 2015-11-01. 
^ Theb.12.816–7
^ Pliny Ep. 3.7.8
^ Fowler, pg.1603
^ Ziolkowski, Jan M.; Putnam, Michael C. J. (2008). The Virgilian Tradition: The First Fifteen Hundred Years. Yale University Press. pp. xxxiv–xxxv. ISBN 0300108222. Retrieved November 11, 2013. 
^ Ziolkowski & Putnam, pp. xxxiv, 829–830.
^ Ziolkowski & Putnam, p. xxxiv.
^ Ziolkowski & Putnem, pp. 101–102.
^ Snyder, James. Northern Renaissance Art, 1985, Harry N. Abrams, ISBN 0136235964, pp. 461–462
^ Chambers, Robert (1832). The Book of Days. London: W and R Chambers. p. 366. 
^ Comparetti, Domenico. Vergil in the Middle Ages. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0691026785. Retrieved 23 November 2016. 
^ Wilson-Okamura, David Scott. Virgil in the Renaissance. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521198127. Retrieved 23 November 2016. 
^ Winkler, Anthony C.; McCuen-Metherell, Jo Ray. Writing the Research Paper: A Handbook. Cengage Learning. p. 278. ISBN 1133169023. Retrieved 23 November 2016. 
Further reading[edit]
Buckham, Philip Wentworth; Spence, Joseph; Holdsworth, Edward; Warburton, William; Jortin, John. Miscellanea Virgiliana: In Scriptis Maxime Eruditorum Virorum Varie Dispersa, in Unum Fasciculum Collecta. Cambridge: Printed for W. P. Grant, 1825.
Conway, R. S. (1915). The youth of Vergil: a lecture delivered in the John Rylands Library on 9 December, 1914. 
Jenkyns, Richard (2007). Classical Epic: Homer and Virgil. London: Duckworth. ISBN 1-85399-133-3. Retrieved 2012-03-20. 
Sondrup, Steven P. (2009). "Virgil: From Farms to Empire: Kierkegaard's Understanding of a Roman Poet" in Kierkegaard and the Roman World edited by Jon Bartley Stewart. Farnham: Ashgate.
External links[edit]
Find more aboutVirgilat Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Learning resources from Wikiversity
Look up Virgil in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Collected works
Works by Virgil at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Virgil at Internet Archive
Works by Virgil at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)
Works of Virgil at the Perseus Digital Library
Latin texts, translations and commentaries
Aeneid translated by T. C. Williams, 1910
Aeneid translated by John Dryden, 1697
Aeneid, Eclogues and Georgics translated by J. C. Greenough, 1900
Works of Virgil at Theoi Project
Aeneid, Eclogues and Georgics translated by H. R. Fairclough, 1916
Works of Virgil at Sacred Texts
Aeneid translated by John Dryden, 1697
Eclogues and Georgics translated by J.W. MacKail, 1934
P. Vergilius Maro at The Latin Library
Virgil's works: text, concordances and frequency list.
Virgil: The Major Texts: contemporary, line by line English translations of Eclogues, Georgics, and Aeneid.
Virgil in the collection of Ferdinand, Duke of Calabria at Somni:
Publii Vergilii Maronis Opera Naples and Milan, 1450.
Publii Vergilii Maronis Opera Italy, between 1470 and 1499.
Publii Vergilii Maronis Opera Milan, 1465.
Biography
Suetonius: The Life of Virgil, an English translation.
Vita Vergiliana, Aelius Donatus' Life of Virgil in the original Latin.
Virgil.org: Aelius Donatus' Life of Virgil translated into English by David Wilson-Okamura
Project Gutenberg edition of Vergil—A Biography, by Tenney Frank.
Vergilian Chronology (in German).
Commentary
"A new Aeneid for the 21st century". A review of Robert Fagles's new translation of the Aeneid in the TLS, February 9, 2007.
Virgilmurder (Jean-Yves Maleuvre's website setting forth his theory that Virgil was murdered by Augustus)
The Secret History of Virgil, containing a selection on the magical legends and tall tales that circulated about Virgil in the Middle Ages.
Interview with Virgil scholar Richard Thomas and poet David Ferry, who recently translated the "Georgics", on ThoughtCast
SORGLL: Aeneid, Bk I, 1–49; read by Robert Sonkowsky
SORGLL: Aeneid, Bk IV, 296–396; read by Stephen Daitz
Bibliographies
Comprehensive bibliographies on all three of Virgil's major works, downloadable in Word or pdf format
Bibliography of works relating Vergil to the literature of the Hellenistic age
A selective Bibliographical Guide to Vergil's Aeneid
Virgil in Late Antiquity, the Middle Ages, and the Renaissance: an Online Bibliography
The article above was originally sourced from Nupedia and is open content.
v
t
e
Works by Virgil
Appendix Vergiliana
Eclogues
Georgics
Aeneid
Commons
Wikiquote
Wikisource texts
v
t
e
Ancient Rome topics
Outline
Timeline
Epochs
Foundation
Kingdom (overthrow)
Republic
Empire
(Pax Romana
Principate
Dominate)
Western Empire (fall
historiography of the fall)
Eastern (Byzantine) Empire (decline
fall)
Constitution
History
Kingdom
Republic
Empire
Late Empire
Senate
Legislative assemblies (Curiate
Centuriate
Tribal
Plebeian)
Executive magistrates
SPQR
Government
Curia
Forum
Cursus honorum
Collegiality
Emperor
Legatus
Dux
Officium
Praefectus
Vicarius
Vigintisexviri
Lictor
Magister militum
Imperator
Princeps senatus
Pontifex Maximus
Augustus
Caesar
Tetrarch
Optimates
Populares
Province
Magistrates
Ordinary
Tribune
Quaestor
Aedile
Praetor
Consul
Censor
Promagistrate
Governor
Extraordinary
Dictator
Magister Equitum
Decemviri
Consular Tribune
Triumvir
Rex
Interrex
Law
Twelve Tables
Mos maiorum
Citizenship
Auctoritas
Imperium
Status
Litigation
Military
Borders
Establishment
Structure
Campaigns
Political control
Strategy
Engineering
Frontiers and fortifications (castra)
Technology
Army (Legion
Infantry tactics
Personal equipment
Siege engines)
Navy (fleets)
Auxiliaries
Decorations and punishments
Hippika gymnasia
Economy
Agriculture
Deforestation
Commerce
Finance
Currency
Republican currency
Imperial currency
Technology
Abacus
Numerals
Civil engineering
Military engineering
Military technology
Aqueducts
Bridges
Circus
Concrete
Domes
Forum
Metallurgy
Roads
Sanitation
Thermae
Culture
Architecture
Art
Bathing
Calendar
Clothing
Cosmetics
Cuisine
Hairstyles
Education
Literature
Music
Mythology
Religion
Romanization
Sexuality
Theatre
Wine
Society
Patricians
Plebs
Conflict of the Orders
Secessio plebis
Equites
Gens
Tribes
Naming conventions
Demography
Women
Marriage
Adoption
Slavery
Bagaudae
Language (Latin)
History
Alphabet
Versions (Old
Classical
Vulgar
Late
Medieval
Renaissance
New
Contemporary
Ecclesiastical)
Romance languages
Writers
Apuleius
Caesar
Catullus
Cicero
Ennius
Horace
Juvenal
Livy
Lucan
Lucretius
Martial
Ovid
Petronius
Phaedrus
Plautus
Pliny the Elder
Pliny the Younger
Propertius
Quintilian
Quintus Curtius Rufus
Sallust
Seneca
Statius
Suetonius
Tacitus
Terence
Tibullus
Marcus Terentius Varro
Virgil
Vitruvius
Major cities
Alexandria
Antioch
Aquileia
Berytus
Bononia
Carthage
Constantinopolis
Eboracum
Leptis Magna
Londinium
Lutetia
Mediolanum
Pompeii
Ravenna
Roma
Smyrna
Vindobona
Volubilis
Lists and other
topics
Wars and battles
Generals
Legions
Emperors
Geographers
Cities and towns
Institutions
Laws
Consuls
Tribunes
Distinguished women
Nomina
Gentes
Climate
Legacy
Fiction / Films
Ancient Rome Portal
 
Associated subjects
v
t
e
Virgil's Aeneid (19 BC)
Characters
Deities
Alecto
Crinisus
Cupid
Hecate
Hymen
Juno
Jupiter
Mars
Mercury
Saturn
Tiberinus
Venus
Humans
Acestes
Achaemenides
Achates
Actor
Aeneads
Aeneas
Aeolus
Ajax the Lesser
Alcathous
Aletes
Amata
Anchises
Androgeos
Andromache
Anna Perenna
Antiphates
Ascanius
Automedon
Aventinus
Butes
Caieta
Camilla
Capys
Cassandra
Catillus
Clonius
Clytius
Creusa
Cydon
Cydonians
Dardanus
Dares Phrygius
Deiphobus
Diomedes
Elymus
Entellus
Erulus
Euryalus
Evander of Pallene
Halaesus
Halys
Helenus
Hippocoon
Iarbas
Ilioneus
Juturna
Laocoön
Latinus
Lausus
Lavinia
Macar
Messapus
Metabus
Mezentius
Mimas
Misenus
Mnestheus
Neoptolemus
Nisus and Euryalus
Ornytus
Palinurus
Pallas
Pandarus
Panthous
Paris
Picus
Polites
Priam
Ripheus
Rutuli
Salius
Sinon
Theano
Thymoetes
Turnus
Ucalegon
Ufens
Phoenicians
Acerbas
Belus II
Dido
Mattan I
Pygmalion of Tyre
Films
The Avenger (1962)
Literature
Roman d'Enéas (1160 poem)
Dido, Queen of Carthage (c.1593 play)
Amelia (1751 novel)
The Dunciad (1729 novel)
Lavinia (2008 novel)
Opera
Didone (1641 Cavalli)
Achille et Polyxène (1687 Lully/Collasse)
Dido and Aeneas (1688 Purcell)
Didon (1693 Desmarets)
Didone abbandonata (1724 Metastasio)
Didone abbandonata (1724 Sarro)
Didone abbandonata (1724 Albinoni)
Didone abbandonata (1762 Sarti)
Didon (1783 Piccinni)
Dido, Queen of Carthage (1792 Storace)
Les Troyens (1858 Berlioz)
Manuscripts
Book of Ballymote
Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 31
Vergilius Augusteus
Vergilius Romanus
Vergilius Vaticanus
Phrases
"Ad astra"
"Annuit cœptis"
"Experto crede"
"Lacrimae rerum"
"Obscuris vera involvens"
"Quos ego"
"Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes"
Art
Laocoön and His Sons (25 BC)
Aeneas, Anchises, and Ascanius (1619)
Ascanius Shooting the Stag of Sylvia (1689)
Dido building Carthage (1815)
Music
"And Then There Was Silence"
Gates of Fire
Study
Aposiopesis
Dactylic hexameter
Hysteron proteron
Sortes Vergilianae
Related
Trojan Horse
The Golden Bough
Eneados
Sulpicius Apollinaris
"Fortune favours the bold"
"Mind over matter"
v
t
e
"Dido and Aeneas" from Virgil's Aeneid
Characters
Dido
Aeneas
Operas
Didone (1641, Cavalli)
Dido and Aeneas (1688, Purcell)
discography
"Dido's Lament"
Didon (1693, Desmarets)
Didone abbandonata (1724, Metastasio)
Didone abbandonata (1724, Sarro)
Didone abbandonata (1724, Albinoni)
Didone abbandonata (1762, Sarti)
Didon (1783, Piccinni)
Dido, Queen of Carthage (1792, Storace)
Les Troyens (1863, Berlioz)
Plays
Dido, Queen of Carthage (c. 1593)
Poetry
Roman d'Enéas (1160)
Music
Simple Man
Art
Dido building Carthage
Related
Low Ham Roman Villa
Amelia
Authority control
WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 8194433
LCCN: n79014062
ISNI: 0000 0001 2119 8069
GND: 118626574
SELIBR: 200505
SUDOC: 026674327
BNF: cb11887823w (data)
BPN: 92514223
ULAN: 500337098
MusicBrainz: 0109a674-73aa-41a0-b52f-512eb878a6dd
NLA: 35579909
NDL: 00459674
NKC: jn19981002320
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\008978
RLS: 000080997
BNE: XX874783
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Virgil&oldid=765389983"
Categories: VirgilPeople from MantuaGolden Age Latin writersLatin-language writersAncient Roman writersRoman-era poets1st-century BC writers1st-century BC Romans1st-century BC Roman poetsBucolic poetsEpic poetsDidactic poetsPeople from the Province of Mantua70 BC births19 BC deathsHidden categories: Pages using ISBN magic linksPages using Infobox writer with unknown parametersArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2011Articles needing additional references from June 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksAC with 16 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BPN identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiers
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
Article
Talk
Variants
Views
Read
Edit
View history
More
Search
Navigation
Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store
Interaction
HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page
Tools
What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page
Print/export
Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource
Languages
АдыгэбзэАдыгабзэAfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛАҧсшәаالعربيةAragonésAsturianuAzərbaycancaবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎भोजपुरीБългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàČeštinaCorsuCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEmiliàn e rumagnòlEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFrançaisFryskFurlanGaeilgeGàidhligGalego贛語客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתBasa JawaქართულიҚазақшаKiswahiliKurdîLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLumbaartMagyarमैथिलीМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیBahasa MelayuMirandésМонголNederlandsनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPatoisPicardPiemontèisPlattdüütschPolskiPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaRipoarischRomânăРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаGagana SamoaSarduScotsSeelterskShqipSicilianuSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیی ناوەندیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TarandíneТатарча/tatarçaไทยTürkçeТыва дылУдмуртУкраїнськаاردوVènetoTiếng ViệtVolapükVõroWinarayייִדישYorùbá粵語ZazakiZeêuwsŽemaitėška中文
Edit links
This page was last modified on 14 February 2017, at 03:46.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.
By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Developers
Cookie statement
Mobile view