John of Damascus - Wikipedia
John of Damascus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to:					navigation, 					search
For the poem by Aleksey Konstantinovich Tolstoy, see John of Damascus (poem).
"Chrysorrhoas" redirects here. For the river, see Barada.
Saint John of Damascus
Ἰωάννης ὁ Δαμασκηνός (Greek)
Ioannes Damascenus (Latin) يوحنا الدمشقي (Arabic)
Saint John Damascene (Arabic icon)
Doctor of the Church
Born
c. 675 or 676
Damascus, Bilad al-Sham, Umayyad Caliphate
Died
December 4, 749(749-12-04)
Mar Saba, Jerusalem, Bilad al-Sham, Umayyad Caliphate
Canonized
Pre-Congregation by Eastern Orthodox Church
Roman Catholic Church
Anglican Communion
Commemorated in Lutheranism
Feast
December 4
March 27 (General Roman Calendar 1890–1969)
Attributes
Severed hand, icon
Patronage
Pharmacists, icon painters, theology students
Saint John of Damascus (Medieval Greek Ἰωάννης ὁ Δαμασκηνός, Ioánnis o Damaskinós, Byzantine Greek pronunciation: [ioˈanis o ðamasciˈnos]; Latin: Ioannes Damascenus), Arabic: يوحنا الدمشقي‎‎, ALA-LC: Yūḥannā ad-Dimashqī); also known as John Damascene and as Χρυσορρόας / Chrysorrhoas (literally "streaming with gold"—i.e., "the golden speaker"; c. 675 or 676 – 4 December 749) was a Syrian monk and priest. Born and raised in Damascus, he died at his monastery, Mar Saba, near Jerusalem.[1]
A polymath whose fields of interest and contribution included law, theology, philosophy, and music, he is said by some sources to have served as a Chief Administrator to the Muslim caliph of Damascus before his ordination.[2][3] He wrote works expounding the Christian faith, and composed hymns which are still used both liturgically in Eastern Christian practice throughout the world as well as in western Lutheranism at Easter.[4] He is one of the Fathers of the Eastern Orthodox church and is best known for his strong defense of icons.[5] The Catholic Church regards him as a Doctor of the Church, often referred to as the Doctor of the Assumption due to his writings on the Assumption of Mary.[6]
The most common source of information for the life of John of Damascus is a work attributed to one John of Jerusalem, identified therein as the Patriarch of Jerusalem.[7] This is an excerpted translation into Greek of an earlier Arabic text. The Arabic original contains a prologue not found in most other translations, and was written by an Arab monk, Michael. Michael explained that he decided to write his biography in 1084 because none was available in his day. However, the main Arabic text seems to have been written by an earlier author sometime between the early 9th and late 10th centuries AD.[7] Written from a hagiographical point of view and prone to exaggeration and some legendary details, it is not the best historical source for his life, but is widely reproduced and considered to contain elements of some value.[8] The hagiographic novel Barlaam and Josaphat, traditionally attributed to John, is in fact a work of the 10th century.[9]
Contents
1 Family background
2 Education
3 Career
4 Last days
5 Veneration
6 List of works
6.1 Early works
6.2 Teachings and dogmatic works
7 The Arabic translation
8 Modern English translations
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links
Family background[edit]
John was born in Damascus in the third quarter of the 7th century AD, to a prominent Damascene Christian family known as "Mansūr".[10] The family was named after John's grandfather, Mansur ibn Sarjun, who had been responsible for the taxes of the region during the reign of Emperor Heraclius.[11][12] Mansur seems to have played a role in the capitulation of Damascus to the troops of Khalid ibn al-Walid in 635 after securing favorable conditions of surrender.[11][12] Eutychius, a 10th-century Melkite patriarch, mentions him as one high-ranking official involved in the surrender of the city to the Muslims.[13]
Though information about the tribal background of the Mansur family are absent in contemporary sources, biographer Daniel Sahas speculates the name Mansur could have implied that they belonged to the Arab Christian tribes of Kalb or Taghlib.[14] Moreover, the family name was common among Syrian Christians of Arab origins, and Eutychius noted that the governor of Damascus, who was likely Mansur ibn Sarjun, was an Arab.[14] However, Sahas also asserts that the name does not necessarily imply an Arab background and could have been used by non-Arab, Semitic Syrians.[14] While Sahas and biographers F. H. Chase and Andrew Louth assert that Mansūr was an Arabic name, Raymond le Coz asserts that the "family was without doubt of Syrian origin";[15] indeed, according to historian Daniel J. Janosik, "Both aspects could be true, for if his family ancestry were indeed Syrian, his grandfather [Mansur] could have been given an Arabic name when the Arabs took over the government."[16] John was raised in Damascus, and Arab Christian folklore holds that during his adolescence, John associated with the future Umayyad caliph Yazid I and the Taghlibi Christian court poet al-Akhtal.[17]
When Syria was conquered by the Muslim Arabs in the 630s, the court at Damascus retained its large complement of Christian civil servants, John's grandfather among them.[11][13] John's father, Sarjun (Sergius), went on to serve the Umayyad caliphs.[11] According to John of Jerusalem and some later versions of his life, after his father's death, John also served as an official to the caliphal court before leaving to become a monk. This claim, that John actually served in a Muslim court, has been questioned since he is never mentioned in Muslim sources, which however do refer to his father Sarjun (Sergius) as a secretary in the caliphal administration.[18] In addition, John's own writings never refer to any experience in a Muslim court. It is believed that John became a monk at Mar Saba, and that he was ordained as a priest in 735.[11][19]
Education[edit]
One of the vitae describes his father's desire for him to "learn not only the books of the Muslims, but those of the Greeks as well." From this it has been suggested that John may have grown up bilingual.[20] John does indeed show some knowledge of the Quran, which he criticizes harshly.[21] (see Christianity and Islam).
Other sources describes his education in Damascus as having been conducted in accordance with the principles of Hellenic education, termed "secular" by one source and "Classical Christian" by another.[22][23] One account identifies his tutor as a monk by the name of Cosmas, who had been kidnapped by Arabs from his home in Sicily, and for whom John's father paid a great price. Under the instruction of Cosmas, who also taught John's orphan friend (the future St. Cosmas of Maiuma), John is said to have made great advances in music, astronomy and theology, soon rivalling Pythagoras in arithmetic and Euclid in geometry.[23] As a refugee from Italy, Cosmas brought with him the scholarly traditions of Western Christianity.
Career[edit]
John had at least one and possibly two careers: one (less well-documented) as a civil servant for the Caliph in Damascus, and the other (better-attested) as a priest and monk at the Mar Saba monastery near Jerusalem. One source believes John left Damascus to become a monk around 706, when al-Walid I increased the Islamicisation of the Caliphate's administration.[24] However, Muslim sources only mention that his father Sarjun (Sergius) left the administration around this time, and fail to name John at all.[18] During the next two decades, culminating in the Siege of Constantinople (717-718), the Umayyad Caliphate progressively occupied the borderlands of the Byzantine Empire. An editor of John's works, Father Le Quien, has shown that John was already a monk at Mar Saba before the dispute over iconoclasm, explained below.[25]
In the early 8th century AD, iconoclasm, a movement opposed to the veneration of icons, gained acceptance in the Byzantine court. In 726, despite the protests of St. Germanus, Patriarch of Constantinople, Emperor Leo III (who had forced the emperor to abdicate and himself assumed the throne in 717 immediately before the great siege) issued his first edict against the veneration of images and their exhibition in public places.[26]
All agree that John of Damascus undertook a spirited defence of holy images in three separate publications. The earliest of these works, his "Apologetic Treatises against those Decrying the Holy Images", secured his reputation. He not only attacked the Byzantine emperor, but adopted a simplified style that allowed the controversy to be followed by the common people, stirring rebellion among those of Christian faith. Decades after his death, John's writings would play an important role during the Second Council of Nicaea (787), which convened to settle the icon dispute.[citation needed]
John's biography recounts at least one episode deemed improbable or legendary.[25][27] Leo III reportedly sent forged documents to the caliph which implicated John in a plot to attack Damascus. The caliph then ordered John's right hand be cut off and hung up in public view. Some days afterwards, John asked for the restitution of his hand, and prayed fervently to the Theotokos before her icon: thereupon, his hand is said to have been miraculously restored.[25] In gratitude for this miraculous healing, he attached a silver hand to the icon, which thereafter became known as the "Three-handed", or Tricheirousa.[28]
Last days[edit]
John died in 749 as a revered Father of the Church, and is recognized as a saint. He is sometimes called the last of the Church Fathers by the Roman Catholic Church. In 1890 he was declared a Doctor of the Church by Pope Leo XIII.
Veneration[edit]
When the name of Saint John of Damascus was inserted in the General Roman Calendar in 1890, it was assigned to 27 March. The feast day was moved in 1969 to the day of the saint's death, 4 December, the day on which his feast day is celebrated also in the Byzantine Rite calendar,[29] Lutheran Commemorations,[30] and the Anglican Communion and Episcopal Church.[31]
The 1884 choral work John of Damascus ("A Russian Requiem"), Op. 1, for four-part mixed chorus and orchestra, by Russian composer Sergei Taneyev, is dedicated to Saint John.
List of works[edit]
John of Damascus Greek icon.
Ioannis Damasceni Opera (1603)
Besides his purely textual works, many of which are listed below, John of Damascus also composed hymns, perfecting the canon, a structured hymn form used in Eastern Orthodox church services.[32]
Early works[edit]
Three Apologetic Treatises against those Decrying the Holy Images – These treatises were among his earliest expositions in response to the edict by the Byzantine Emperor Leo III, banning the veneration or exhibition of holy images.[33]
Teachings and dogmatic works[edit]
Fountain of Knowledge or The Fountain of Wisdom, is divided into three parts:
Philosophical Chapters (Kefálea filosofiká) – commonly called 'Dialectic', it deals mostly with logic, its primary purpose being to prepare the reader for a better understanding of the rest of the book.
Concerning Heresy (Perì eréseon) – the last chapter of this part (Chapter 101) deals with the Heresy of the Ishmaelites.[34] Unlike earlier sections devoted to other heresies, which are disposed of succinctly in just a few lines, this chapter runs into several pages. It constitutes one of the first Christian refutations of Islam. One of the most dominant translations his polemical work Peri haireseon, translated from Greek into Latin. His manuscript is one of the first Orthodox Christian refutations of Islam which has influenced the Western Catholic Church's attitude. It was among the first sources representing the Prophet of Islam Muhammad to the West as "false prophet," and "Antichrist.[35]
An Exact Exposition of the Orthodox Faith (Ékdosis akribès tēs Orthodóxou Písteōs) – a summary of the dogmatic writings of the Early Church Fathers. This writing was the first work of Scholasticism in Eastern Christianity and an important influence on later Scholastic works.[36]
Against the Jacobites
Against the Nestorians
Dialogue against the Manichees
Elementary Introduction into Dogmas
Letter on the Thrice-Holy Hymn
On Right Thinking
On the Faith, Against the Nestorians
On the Two Wills in Christ (Against the Monothelites)
Sacred Parallels (dubious)
Octoechos (the Church's service book of eight tones)
On Dragons and Ghosts
The Arabic translation[edit]
John of Damascus.
It is believed that the homily on the Annunciation was the first work to be translated into Arabic. Much of this text is found in Manuscript 4226 of the Library of Strasbourg (France), dating to 885 AD.[37]
Later in the 10th century, Antony, superior of the monastery of St. Simon (near Antioch) translated a corpus of saint John Damascene. In his introduction to John's work, Sylvestre patriarch of Antioch (1724–1766) said that Antony was monk at Saint Saba. This could be a misunderstanding of the title Superior of Saint Simon probably because Saint Simon's monastery was in ruins in the 18th century.[38]
Most manuscripts give the text of the letter to Cosmas,[39] the philosophical chapters,[40] the theological chapters and five other small works.[41] Since March 2013, a first edition of this translation is available on the web.[42]
In 1085, Mikhael, a monk from Antioch wrote the Arabic life of the Chrysorrhoas.[43] This work was first edited by Bacha in 1912 and then translated in many languages (German, Russian and English).
Modern English translations[edit]
On holy images; followed by three sermons on the Assumption, translated by Mary H. Allies, (London: Thomas Baker, 1898).
Exposition of the Orthodox faith, translated by the Reverend SDF Salmond, in Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers. 2nd Series vol 9. (Oxford: Parker, 1899) [reprint Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1963.]
Writings, translated by Frederic H. Chase. Fathers of the Church vol 37, (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1958) [ET of The fount of knowledge; On heresies; The orthodox faith]
Daniel J. Sahas, John of Damascus on Islam: The "Heresy of the Ishmaelites", (Leiden: Brill, 1972)
On the divine images: the apologies against those who attack the divine images, translated by David Anderson, (New York: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, 1980)
Three Treatises on the Divine Images. Popular Patristics. Translated by Andrew Louth. Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. 2003. ISBN 0-88141-245-7.  Louth, who also wrote the introduction, was at the University of Durham as Professor of Patristics and Byzantine Studies.
Two translations exist of the 10th century hagiographic novel Barlaam and Josaphat, traditionally attributed to John:
Barlaam and Ioasaph, with an English translation by G.R. Woodward and H. Mattingly, (London: Heinemann, 1914)
The precious pearl: the lives of Saints Barlaam and Ioasaph, notes and comments by Augoustinos N Kantiotes; preface, introduction, and new translation by Asterios Gerostergios, et al., (Belmont, MA: Institute for Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies, 1997)
Notes[edit]
^ M. Walsh, ed. Butler's Lives of the Saints (HarperCollins Publishers: New York, 1991), p. 403.
^ Suzanne Conklin Akbari, Idols in the East: European representations of Islam and the Orient, 1100-1450, Cornell University Press, 2009 p. 204
^ David Richard Thomas, Syrian Christians under Islam: the first thousand years, Brill 2001 p. 19.
^ Lutheran Service Book (Concordia Publishing House, St. Louis, 2006), pp. 478, 487.
^ Aquilina 1999, p. 222
^ Rengers, Christopher (2000). The 33 Doctors of the Church. Tan Books. p. 200. ISBN 978-0-89555-440-6. 
^ a b Sahas 1972, p. 32
^ Sahas 1972, p. 35
^ R. Volk, ed., Historiae animae utilis de Barlaam et Ioasaph (Berlin, 2006).
^ Griffith 2001, p. 20
^ a b c d e Brown 2003, p. 307
^ a b Janosik 2016, p. 25
^ a b Sahas 1972, p. 17
^ a b c Sahas 1972, p. 7
^ Janosik 2016, p. 26
^ Janosik 2016, pp. 26–27
^ Griffith 2001, p. 21
^ a b Hoyland 1996, p. 481
^ McEnhill & Newlands 2004, p. 154
^ Valantasis, p. 455
^ Hoyland 1996, pp. 487–489
^ Louth 2002, p. 284
^ a b Butler, Jones & Burns 2000, p. 36
^ Louth 2003, p. 9
^ a b c Catholic Online. "St. John of Damascus". catholic.org. 
^ O'Connor, John Bonaventure. "St. John Damascene". The Catholic Encyclopedia. New Advent. Retrieved 9 April 2011. 
^ Jameson 2008, p. 24
^ Louth 2002, pp. 17, 19
^ Calendarium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 1969), pp. 109, 119; cf. Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
^ Kinnaman, Scot A. Lutheranism 101 (Concordia Publish House, St. Louis, 2010) p. 278.
^ Lesser Feasts and Fasts, 2006 (Church Publishing, 2006), pp. 92–93.
^ Shahîd 2009, p. 195
^ St. John Damascene on Holy Images, Followed by Three Sermons on the Assumption – Eng. transl. by Mary H. Allies, London, 1899.
^ "St. John of Damascus: Critique of Islam". orthodoxinfo.com. 
^ Sbaihat, Ahlam (2015), "Stereotypes associated with real prototypes of the prophet of Islam's name till the 19th century". Jordan Journal of Modern Languages and Literature Vol. 7, No. 1, 2015, pp. 21–38. http://journals.yu.edu.jo/jjmll/Issues/vol7no12015/Nom2.pdf
^ Ines, Angeli Murzaku (2009). Returning home to Rome: the Basilian monks of Grottaferrata in Albania. 00046 Grottaferrata (Roma) - Italy: Analekta Kryptoferri. p. 37. ISBN 88-89345-04-7. 
^ http://www.amazon.fr/Homily-Annunciation-John-Damascus-ebook/dp/B00C1SS0NS/
^ Nasrallah, Saint Jean de Damas, son époque, sa vie, son oeuvre, Harissa, 1930, p. 180
^ Habib Ibrahim. "Letter to Cosmas - Lettre à Cosmas de Jean Damascène (Arabe)". academia.edu. 
^ http://www.amazon.fr/Philosophical-chapters-Arabic-ebook/dp/B00BZWCB1I/
^ Nasrallah, Joseph. Histoire III, pp. 273–281
^ http://www.amazon.fr/Philosophical-chapters-Arabic-Damascus-ebook/dp/B00BZWCB1I
^ Habib Ibrahim. "Arabic life of John Damascene - Vie arabe de Jean Damascène". academia.edu. 
References[edit]
Aquilina, Mike (1999). The Fathers of the Church: An Introduction to the First Christian Teachers (illustrated ed.). Our Sunday Visitor Publishing. ISBN 978-0-87-973689-7. 
Michiel Op de Coul en Marcel Poorthuis, 2011. De eerste christelijke polemiek met de islam ISBN 978-90-211-4282-1
Brown, Peter Robert Lamont (2003). The Rise of Western Christendom: Triumph and Diversity, A.D. 200–1000 (2nd, illustrated ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-63-122138-8. 
Butler, Alban; Jones, Kathleen; Burns, Paul (2000). Butler's lives of the saints: Volume 12 of Butler's Lives of the Saints Series (Revised ed.). Continuum International Publishing Group. ISBN 0-86012-261-1. 
Griffith, Sidney (2001). "'Melkites', 'Jacobites', and the Christological Controversies in Arabic in Third/Ninth-Century Syria". In Thomas, David. Syrian Christians Under Islam: The First Thousand Years. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 90-04-12055-6. 
Hoyland, Robert G. (1996). Seeing Islam as Others Saw It: A Survey and Evaluation of Christian, Jewish, and Zoroastrian Writings on Early Islam. Darwin Press. ISBN 978-0-87850-125-0. 
Jameson (2008). Legends of the Madonna. BiblioBazaar, LLC. ISBN 0-554-33413-5. 
Janosik, Daniel J. (2016). John of Damascus: First Apologist to the Muslims. Eugene, Oregon: Pickwick Publications. ISBN 978-1-4982-8984-9. 
Louth, Andrew (2002). St. John Damascene: tradition and originality in Byzantine theology (Illustrated ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-925238-6. 
Louth, Andrew (2003). Three Treatises on the Divine Images. St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. ISBN 0-88141-245-7. 
Louth, Andrew (2005). St John Damascene: Tradition and Originality in Byzantine Theology. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-927527-4. 
McEnhill, Peter; Newlands, G. M. (2004). Fifty Key Christian Thinkers. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-17049-4. 
Shahîd, Irfan (2009). Byzantium and the Arabs in the Sixth Century: Economic, Social, and Cultural History, Volume 2, Part 2. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-88-402347-0. 
Sahas, Daniel J. (1972). John of Damascus on Islam. BRILL. ISBN 90-04-03495-1. 
Vila, David (2000). Richard Valantasis, ed. Religions of Late Antiquity in Practice (Illustrated ed.). Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-05751-6. 
The Works of St. John Damascene. Martis Publishing House, Moscow. 1997. 
External links[edit]
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
John of Damascus
Wikiquote has quotations related to: John of Damascus
Wikimedia Commons has media related to John of Damascus.
131 Christians Everyone Should Know- John of Damascus
Catholic Encyclopedia: St. John Damascene
Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
Catholic Online Saints
Details of his work
St John Damascene on Holy Images (πρὸς τοὺς διαβάλλοντας τᾶς ἁγίας εἰκόνας). Followed by Three Sermons on the Assumption (κοίμησις) at Project Gutenberg; also available through the Internet Archive.
Works by John of Damascus at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about John of Damascus at Internet Archive
Works by John of Damascus at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)
"St. John of Damascus' Critique of Islam" at the Orthodox Christian Information Center
Greek Opera Omnia by Migne, Patrologia Graeca with Analytical Indexes
St John of Damascus Orthodox Icon and Synaxarion (December 4)
Five Doctrinal Works is a 17th-century manuscript including three works by John of Damascus
v
t
e
Syriac Christianity
West Syrian
churches
Catholic
Maronite Church
Syriac Catholic Church
Orthodox
Syriac Orthodox Church
East Syrian
churches
Current
Ancient Church of the East
Assyrian Church of the East
Chaldean Catholic Church
Assyrian Evangelical Church
Assyrian Pentecostal Church
Historical
Church of the East
related: Nestorianism, Timothy I (Nestorian Patriarch)
Indian
Saint Thomas
churches
Catholic
Syro-Malabar Catholic Church
Syro-Malankara Catholic Church
Orthodox
Jacobite Syrian Christian Church (Syriac Orthodox Church in India)
Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church (Indian Orthodox Church)
Malabar Independent Syrian Church
Church of the East
Chaldean Syrian Church (Assyrian Church of the East in India)
Oriental and Reformed
Malankara Marthoma Syrian Church(Mar Thoma Church of Malabar)
Languages
Assyrian Neo-Aramaic
Bohtan Neo-Aramaic
Chaldean Neo-Aramaic
Garshuni
Hértevin
Koy Sanjaq Surat
Mlahsô
Senaya
Syriac Malayalam
Turoyo
Liturgical: Syriac
Identity
Terms for Syriac Christians
Assyrian nationalism
Saint Thomas Christians
v
t
e
Doctors of the Catholic Church
Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek
Catholicism portal
v
t
e
Catholic saints
Virgin Mary
Mother of God (Theotokos)
Immaculate Conception
Perpetual virginity
Assumption
Marian apparition
Guadalupe
Laus
Miraculous Medal
Lourdes
Fatima
Apostles
Andrew
Barnabas
Bartholomew
James of Alphaeus
James the Greater
John
Jude
Matthew
Matthias
Paul
Peter
Philip
Simon
Thomas
Archangels
Gabriel
Michael
Raphael
Confessors
Anatolius
Chariton the Confessor
Edward the Confessor
Maximus the Confessor
Michael of Synnada
Paphnutius the Confessor
Paul I of Constantinople
Salonius
Theophanes the Confessor
Disciples
Apollos
Mary Magdalene
Priscilla and Aquila
Silvanus
Stephen
Timothy
Titus
Seventy disciples
Doctors
Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek
Evangelists
Matthew
Mark
Luke
John
Fathers
Alexander of Alexandria
Alexander of Jerusalem
Ambrose of Milan
Anatolius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Augustine of Hippo
Caesarius of Arles
Caius
Cappadocian Fathers
Clement of Alexandria
Clement of Rome
Cyprian of Carthage
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
Damasus I
Desert Fathers
Desert Mothers
Dionysius of Alexandria
Dionysius of Corinth
Dionysius
Ephrem the Syrian
Epiphanius of Salamis
Fulgentius of Ruspe
Gregory the Great
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Hilary of Poitiers
Hippolytus of Rome
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus of Lyons
Isidore of Seville
Jerome of Stridonium
John Chrysostom
John of Damascus
Maximus the Confessor
Melito of Sardis
Quadratus of Athens
Papias of Hierapolis
Peter Chrysologus
Polycarp of Smyrna
Theophilus of Antioch
Victorinus of Pettau
Vincent of Lerins
Zephyrinus
Martyrs
Canadian Martyrs
Carthusian Martyrs
Forty Martyrs of England and Wales
Four Crowned Martyrs
Great Martyr
The Holy Innocents
Irish Martyrs
Joan of Arc
Lübeck martyrs
Korean Martyrs
Martyrology
Martyrs of Albania
Martyrs of China
Martyrs of Japan
Martyrs of Laos
Martyrs of Natal
Martyrs of Otranto
Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War
Perpetua and Felicity
Saints of the Cristero War
Stephen
Three Martyrs of Chimbote
Uganda Martyrs
Vietnamese Martyrs
Patriarchs
Adam
Abel
Abraham
Isaac
Jacob
Joseph
Joseph (father of Jesus)
David
Noah
Solomon
Matriarchs
Popes
Adeodatus I
Adeodatus II
Adrian III
Agapetus I
Agatho
Alexander I
Anacletus
Anastasius I
Anicetus
Anterus
Benedict II
Boniface I
Boniface IV
Caius
Callixtus I
Celestine I
Celestine V
Clement I
Cornelius
Damasus I
Dionysius
Eleuterus
Eugene I
Eusebius
Eutychian
Evaristus
Fabian
Felix I
Felix III
Felix IV
Gelasius I
Gregory I
Gregory II
Gregory III
Gregory VII
Hilarius
Hormisdas
Hyginus
Innocent I
John I
John XXIII
John Paul II
Julius I
Leo I
Leo II
Leo III
Leo IV
Leo IX
Linus
Lucius I
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Mark
Martin I
Miltiades
Nicholas I
Paschal I
Paul I
Peter
Pius I
Pius V
Pius X
Pontian
Sergius I
Silverius
Simplicius
Siricius
Sixtus I
Sixtus II
Sixtus III
Soter
Stephen I
Stephen IV
Sylvester I
Symmachus
Telesphorus
Urban I
Victor I
Vitalian
Zachary
Zephyrinus
Zosimus
Prophets
Agabus
Amos
Anna
Baruch ben Neriah
David
Dalua
Elijah
Ezekiel
Habakkuk
Haggai
Hosea
Isaiah
Jeremiah
Job
Joel
John the Baptist
Jonah
Judas Barsabbas
Malachi
Melchizedek
Micah
Moses
Nahum
Obadiah
Samuel
Seven Maccabees and their mother
Simeon
Zechariah (prophet)
Zechariah (NT)
Zephaniah
Virgins
Agatha of Sicily
Agnes of Rome
Cecilia
Clare of Assisi
Eulalia of Mérida
Euphemia
Genevieve
Kateri Tekakwitha
Lucy of Syracuse
Maria Goretti
Narcisa de Jesús
Rose of Lima
Catholicism portal
Saints portal
Authority control
WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 44435485
LCCN: n80032173
ISNI: 0000 0001 1918 6739
GND: 118557971
SELIBR: 191682
SUDOC: 026938626
BNF: cb13091499p (data)
NLA: 36232000
NKC: jo20000075529
BNE: XX961191
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_of_Damascus&oldid=764964607"
Categories: 676 births749 deathsSyrian ChristiansChurch FathersDoctors of the Church8th-century writers8th-century Christian theologians7th-century Christian theologiansPeople from DamascusByzantine saintsByzantine composersSyrian saintsSystematic theologiansArab Christians8th-century Christian saintsAnti-GnosticismByzantine IconoclasmByzantine hymnographersCritics of IslamHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles containing Latin-language textArticles containing Arabic-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2014Commons category with page title same as on WikidataArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersPages using ISBN magic links
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
Article
Talk
Variants
Views
Read
Edit
View history
More
Search
Navigation
Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store
Interaction
HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page
Tools
What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page
Print/export
Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource
Languages
العربيةܐܪܡܝܐAsturianuAzərbaycancaБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎БългарскиBrezhonegCatalàČeštinaDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어ՀայերենHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתქართულიKiswahiliКыргызчаLatinaMagyarMalagasyമലയാളംمصرىNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålOccitanPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийScotsShqipSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaதமிழ்తెలుగుУкраїнськаTiếng Việt中文
Edit links
This page was last modified on 11 February 2017, at 22:54.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.
By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Developers
Cookie statement
Mobile view