Epictetus - Wikipedia
Epictetus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to:					navigation, 					search
This article is about the philosopher. For the vase painter, see Epiktetos.
Epictetus
Artistic impression of Epictetus, including his crutch
Born
c. 50 AD
Hierapolis, Phrygia
(presumed)
Died
AD 135 (aged 84–85)
Nicopolis, Achaea
Era
Ancient philosophy
Region
Western Philosophy
School
Stoicism
Main interests
Ethics
Influences
Musonius Rufus, Socrates, Diogenes, Zeno of Citium, Cleanthes, Chrysippus, Hippocrates
Influenced
Arrian, Junius Rusticus, Marcus Aurelius, Albert Ellis, Han Ryner, James Stockdale
Epictetus (/ˌɛpɪkˈtiːtəs/;[1] Greek: Ἐπίκτητος, Epíktētos; c. AD 50 – 135) was a Greek-speaking Stoic philosopher. He was born a slave at Hierapolis, Phrygia (present day Pamukkale, Turkey) and lived in Rome until his banishment, when he went to Nicopolis in northwestern Greece for the rest of his life. His teachings were written down and published by his pupil Arrian in his Discourses and Enchiridion.
Epictetus taught that philosophy is a way of life and not just a theoretical discipline. To Epictetus, all external events are beyond our control; we should accept calmly and dispassionately whatever happens. However, individuals are responsible for their own actions, which they can examine and control through rigorous self-discipline.
Contents
1 Life
2 Thought
3 Influence
3.1 Military
3.1.1 James Stockdale
3.2 Philosophy
3.2.1 Marcus Aurelius
3.2.2 Simplicius of Cilicia
3.2.3 Bernard Stiegler
3.2.4 Eckhart Tolle
3.3 Literature
3.3.1 François Rabelais
3.4 Psychology
3.5 Religion
3.6 Acting
4 See also
5 Notes
6 Further reading
7 External links
Life[edit]
Epictetus was born c. 50 A.D.,[2][3] presumably at Hierapolis, Phrygia.[4] The name his parents gave him is unknown; the word epíktetos (ἐπίκτητος) in Greek simply means "gained" or "acquired";[5] the Greek philosopher Plato, in his Laws, uses the term as property that is "added to one's hereditary property".[6] He spent his youth as a slave in Rome to Epaphroditos, a wealthy freedman and secretary to Nero.[7]
Early in life, Epictetus acquired a passion for philosophy and, with the permission of his wealthy owner, he studied Stoic philosophy under Musonius Rufus,[8] which allowed him to rise in respectability as he grew more educated.[9] Somehow, he became crippled. Origen stated that his leg was deliberately broken by his master.[10] Simplicius stated that he had been lame from childhood.[11]
Roman-era ruins at Nicopolis
Epictetus obtained his freedom sometime after the death of Nero in 68 A.D.,[12] and he began to teach philosophy in Rome. About 93 A.D. Emperor Domitian banished all philosophers from the city,[13] and Epictetus went to Nicopolis in Epirus, Greece, where he founded a philosophical school.[14]
His most famous pupil, Arrian, studied under him when a young man (c. 108 A.D.) and claimed to have written the famous Discourses from his lecture notes, which he argued should be considered comparable to the Socratic literature.[15] Arrian describes Epictetus as being a powerful speaker who could "induce his listener to feel just what Epictetus wanted him to feel."[16] Many eminent figures sought conversations with him.[17] Emperor Hadrian was friendly with him,[18] and may have listened to him speak at his school in Nicopolis.[19][20]
He lived a life of great simplicity, with few possessions.[11] He lived alone for a long time,[21] but in his old age he adopted a friend's child who otherwise, would have been left to die, and raised him with the aid of a woman.[22] It is unclear whether Epictetus and she were married.[23] He died sometime around 135 A.D.[24] After his death, according to Lucian, his oil lamp was purchased by an admirer for 3,000 drachmae.[25]
Thought[edit]
An eighteenth century engraving of Epictetus
No writings by Epictetus are known. His discourses were transcribed and compiled by his pupil Arrian (author of the Anabasis Alexandri).[16] The main work is, The Discourses, four books of which have been preserved (out of the original eight).[26] Arrian also compiled a popular digest, entitled the Enchiridion, or Handbook. In a preface to the Discourses that is addressed to Lucius Gellius, Arrian states that "whatever I heard him say I used to write down, word for word, as best I could, endeavouring to preserve it as a memorial, for my own future use, of his way of thinking and the frankness of his speech."[16]
Epictetus maintains that the foundation of all philosophy is self-knowledge, that is, the conviction of our ignorance and gullibility ought to be the first subject of our study.[27] Logic provides valid reasoning and certainty in judgment, but it is subordinate to practical needs.[28] The first and most necessary part of philosophy concerns the application of doctrine, for example, that people should not lie. The second concerns reasons, e.g. why people should not lie. While the third, lastly, examines and establishes the reasons.[29] This is the logical part, which finds reasons, shows what is a reason, and that a given reason is a correct one.[29] This last part is necessary, but only on account of the second, which again is rendered necessary by the first.[30]
Both the Discourses and the Enchiridion begin by distinguishing between those things in our power (prohairetic things) and those things not in our power (aprohairetic things).[31]
That alone is in our power, which is our own work; and in this class are our opinions, impulses, desires, and aversions. What, on the contrary, is not in our power, are our bodies, possessions, glory, and power. Any delusion on this point leads to the greatest errors, misfortunes, and troubles, and to the slavery of the soul.[32]
We have no power over external things, and the good that ought to be the object of our earnest pursuit, is to be found only within ourselves.[33]
The determination between what is good and what is not good is made by the capacity for choice (prohairesis).[34] Prohairesis allows us to act, and gives us the kind of freedom that only rational animals have.[35] It is determined by our reason, which of all our faculties, sees and tests itself and everything else.[36] It is the correct use of the impressions (phantasia) that bombard the mind that is in our power:[37]
Practise then from the start to say to every harsh impression, "You are an impression, and not at all the thing you appear to be." Then examine it and test it by these rules you have, and firstly, and chiefly, by this: whether the impression has to do with the things that are up to us, or those that are not; and if it has to do with the things that are not up to us, be ready to reply, "It is nothing to me."[38]
We will not be troubled at any loss, but will say to ourselves on such an occasion: "I have lost nothing that belongs to me; it was not something of mine that was torn from me, but something that was not in my power has left me." Nothing beyond the use of our opinion is properly ours. Every possession rests on opinion. What is to cry and to weep? An opinion. What is misfortune, or a quarrel, or a complaint? All these things are opinions; opinions founded on the delusion that what is not subject to our own choice can be either good or evil, which it cannot.[33] By rejecting these opinions, and seeking good and evil in the power of choice alone, we may confidently achieve peace of mind in every condition of life.[39]
Reason alone is good, the irrational is evil, and the irrational is intolerable to the rational.[40] The good person should labour chiefly on their own reason; to perfect this is in our power.[41] To repel evil opinions by the good is the noble contest in which humans should engage; it is not an easy task, but it promises true freedom, peace of mind (ataraxia), and a divine command over the emotions (apatheia).[42] We should especially be on our guard against the opinion of pleasure because of its apparent sweetness and charms.[43] The first object of philosophy, therefore, is to purify the mind.[44]
Epictetus teaches that the preconceptions (prolepsis) of good and evil are common to all.[45] Good alone is profitable and to be desired, and evil is hurtful and to be avoided.[46] Different opinions arise only from the application of these preconceptions to particular cases, and it is then that the darkness of ignorance, which blindly maintains the correctness of its own opinion, must be dispelled.[45] People entertain different and conflicting opinions of good, and in their judgment of a particular good, people frequently contradict themselves.[47] Philosophy should provide a standard for good and evil.[48] This process is greatly facilitated because the mind and the works of the mind are alone in our power, whereas all external things that aid life are beyond our control.[48]
The essence of divinity is goodness; we have all good that could be given to us.[49] The deities too gave us the soul and reason, which is not measured by breadth or depth, but by knowledge and sentiments, and by which we attain to greatness, and may equal even with the deities. We should, therefore, cultivate the mind with special care.[50] If we wish for nothing, but what God wills, we shall be truly free, and all will come to pass with us according to our desire; and we shall be as little subject to restraint as Zeus himself.[51]
Every individual is connected with the rest of the world, and the universe is fashioned for universal harmony.[50] Wise people, therefore, will pursue, not merely their own will, but also will be subject to the rightful order of the world.[52] We should conduct ourselves through life fulfilling all our duties as children, siblings, parents, and citizens.[53]
For our country or friends we ought to be ready to undergo or perform the greatest difficulties.[54] The good person, if able to foresee the future, would peacefully and contentedly help to bring about their own sickness, maiming, and even death, knowing that this is the correct order of the universe.[55] We have all a certain part to play in the world, and we have done enough when we have performed what our nature allows.[56] In the exercise of our powers, we may become aware of the destiny we are intended to fulfill.[57]
We are like travellers at an inn, or guests at a stranger's table; whatever is offered we take with thankfulness, and sometimes, when the turn comes, we may refuse; in the former case we are a worthy guest of the deities, and in the latter we appear as a sharer in their power.[58] Anyone who finds life intolerable is free to quit it, but we should not abandon our appointed role without sufficient reason.[59] The Stoic sage will never find life intolerable and will complain of no one, neither deity nor human.[60] Those who go wrong we should pardon and treat with compassion, since it is from ignorance that they err, being as it were, blind.[61]
It is only our opinions and principles that can render us unhappy, and it is only the ignorant person who finds fault with another.[62] Every desire degrades us, and renders us slaves of what we desire.[62] We ought not to forget the transitory character of all external advantages, even in the midst of our enjoyment of them; but always to bear in mind that they are not our own, and that therefore, they do not properly belong to us. Thus prepared, we shall never be carried away by opinions.[63]
The final entry of the Enchiridion, or Handbook, begins: "Upon all occasions we ought to have these maxims ready at hand":
Conduct me, Zeus, and thou, O Destiny,
Wherever thy decree has fixed my lot.
I follow willingly; and, did I not,
Wicked and wretched would I follow still.
(Diogenes Laertius quoting Cleanthes; quoted also by Seneca, Epistle 107.)"
Whoe'er yields properly to Fate is deemed
Wise among men, and knows the laws of Heaven.
(From Euripides' Fragments, 965)
O Crito, if it thus pleases the gods, thus let it be.
(From Plato's Crito)
Anytus and Meletus may indeed kill me, but they cannot harm me.
(From Plato's Apology)
Influence[edit]
Military[edit]
Prisoner of war James Stockdale receiving the Medal of Honor from American president Gerald Ford; Stockdale was able to retain his sanity during capture by relying on the philosophy of Epictetus
James Stockdale[edit]
The philosophy of Epictetus is well known in the U.S. military through the writings and example of James Stockdale, an American fighter pilot who was shot down over North Vietnam, became a prisoner of war during the Vietnam War, and later a vice presidential candidate. In Courage under Fire: Testing Epictetus's Doctrines in a Laboratory of Human Behavior (1993), Stockdale credits Epictetus with helping him endure seven and a half years in a North Vietnamese military prison—including torture—and four years in solitary confinement.[64]
In his conclusion, Stockdale quoted Epictetus as saying, "The emotions of grief, pity, and even affection are well-known disturbers of the soul. Grief is the most offensive; Epictetus considered the suffering of grief an act of evil. It is a willful act, going against the will of God to have all men share happiness" (p. 235).
Philosophy[edit]
Marcus Aurelius[edit]
The philosophy of Epictetus was an influence on the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius (121 to 180 A.D.) whose reign was marked by wars with the resurgent Parthia in southern Asia and against the Germanic tribes in Europe. Aurelius quotes from Epictetus repeatedly in his own work, Meditations, written during his campaigns in central Europe.[65]
Simplicius of Cilicia[edit]
In the sixth century, the Neoplatonist philosopher Simplicius, who was persecuted for his pagan beliefs during the reign of Justinian, wrote an extant commentary on the Enchiridion. At the end of the commentary Simplicius wrote: "Nor does my writing this commentary prove beneficial to others only, for I myself have already found great advantage from it, by the agreeable diversion it has given me, in a season of trouble and public calamity." George Long considered the commentary "worth reading", but then opined, "But how many will read it? Perhaps one in a million."[66]
Bernard Stiegler[edit]
When Bernard Stiegler was imprisoned for five years for armed robbery in France, he assembled an "ensemble of disciplines," which he called (in reference to Epictetus) his melete. This ensemble amounted to a practice of reading and writing that Stiegler derived from the writings of Epictetus. This led to his transformation, and upon being released from incarceration he became a professional philosopher. Stiegler tells the story of this transformation in his book, Acting Out.[67]
Eckhart Tolle[edit]
Popular spiritual guru Eckhart Tolle has spoken at length on Epictetus and stoicism, particularly with regard to how the Roman's thought process while enduring physical and circumstantial suffering provides insight into eastern philosophy.[68]
Literature[edit]
The philosophy of Epictetus plays a key role in the 1998 novel by Tom Wolfe, A Man in Full. This was in part the outcome of discussions Wolfe had with James Stockdale (see above). The importance of Epictetus' Stoicism for Stockdale, its role in A Man in Full, and its significance in Ridley Scott's Gladiator is discussed by William O. Stephens[69] in The Rebirth of Stoicism?[70]
Mohun Biswas, in the novel A House for Mr Biswas (1961), by V.S. Naipaul, is pleased to think himself a follower of Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius; the irony is that he never actually behaves as a Stoic.
“Everything has two handles, the one by which it may be carried, the other by which it cannot” is the theme of Disturbances in the Field (1983), by Lynne Sharon Schwartz. Lydia, the central character, turns often to The Golden Sayings of Epictetus—the latter being a modern selection from the writings of Epictetus, compiled and translated by Hastings Crossley.
A line from the Enchiridion is used as a title quotation in The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman by Laurence Sterne, which translates to, "Not things, but opinions about things, trouble men."[71] The quotation alludes to a theme of the novel about how the suffering of many of its characters (above all Walter Shandy) is the result of the opinions and assumptions they make about reality.
Epictetus is mentioned in A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man by James Joyce: in the fifth chapter of the novel the protagonist Stephen Daedalus discusses Epictetus's famous lamp with a dean of his college.[72] Epictetus also is mentioned briefly in Franny and Zooey by J. D. Salinger, and is referred to by Theodore Dreiser in his novel Sister Carrie. Both the longevity of Epictetus's life and his philosophy are alluded to in John Berryman's poem, "Of Suicide."
Epictetus is referred to, but not mentioned by name, in Matthew Arnold's sonnet "To a Friend". Arnold provides three historical personalities as his inspiration and support in difficult times (Epictetus is preceded by Homer and succeeded by Sophocles):
Much he, whose friendship I not long since won,
That halting slave, who in Nicopolis
Taught Arrian, when Vespasian's brutal son
Cleared Rome of what most shamed him.[73]
François Rabelais[edit]
In the Chapter XXX of François Rabelais' Pantagruel (c.1532), Pantagruel's tutor Epistemon had his head cut off after a battle. After he had his head reattached and was brought back to life, he recounts his experience of the damned in hell: "Their estate and condition of living is but only changed after a very strange manner;"..."After this manner, those that had been great lords and ladies here, got but a poor scurvy wretched living there below. And, on the contrary, the philosophers and others, who in this world had been altogether indigent and wanting, were great lords there in their turn."..."I saw Epictetus there, most gallantly apparelled after the French fashion, sitting under a pleasant arbour, with store of handsome gentlewomen, frolicking, drinking, dancing, and making good cheer, with abundance of crowns of the sun. Above the lattice were written these verses for his device:
To leap and dance, to sport and play,
And drink good wine both white and brown,
Or nothing else do all the day
But tell bags full of many a crown.
When he saw me, he invited me to drink with him very courteously, and I being willing to be entreated, we tippled and chopined together most theologically. In the meantime came Cyrus to beg one farthing of him for the honour of Mercury, therewith to buy a few onions for his supper. No, no, said Epictetus, I do not use in my almsgiving to bestow farthings. Hold, thou varlet, there's a crown for thee; be an honest man."
Psychology[edit]
Psychologist Albert Ellis, the founder of Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy, credited Epictetus with providing a foundation for his system of psychotherapy.[74][75][76]
Religion[edit]
Kiyozawa Manshi, a controversial reformer within the Higashi Honganji branch of Jodo Shinshu Buddhism cited Epictetus as one of the three major influences on his spiritual development and thought.[citation needed]
Acting[edit]
Epictetus' philosophy is an influence on the acting method introduced by David Mamet and William H. Macy, known as Practical Aesthetics. The main book that describes the method, The Practical Handbook for the Actor, lists the Enchiridion in the bibliography.
See also[edit]
List of slaves
Notes[edit]
^ Jones, Daniel; Roach, Peter, James Hartman and Jane Setter, eds. Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary. 17th edition. Cambridge UP, 2006.
^ Epitteto Filosofico
^ His year of birth is uncertain. He was born a slave. He must have been old enough to teach philosophy by the time Domitian banished all philosophers from Rome c. 93 A.D, because he was among those who left the city. He also describes himself as an old man to Arrian c. 108 A.D. cf. Discourses, i.9.10; i.16.20; ii.6.23; etc.
^ Suda. Epictetus.
^ "Perseus Tuft Greek Word Study Tool, 'ἐπίκτητος'". 
^ "Plato, Laws, section 924a". 
^ Epaphroditus, livius.org
^ Epictetus, Discourses, i.7.32.
^ Epictetus, Discourses, i.9.29.
^ Origen, Contra Celcus. vii.
^ a b Simplicius, Commentary on the Enchiridion, 13.
^ Douglas J. Soccio, Archetypes of Wisdom: An Introduction to Philosophy (2012), p. 197
^ Suetonius, Domitian, x.
^ Aulus Gellius, Attic Nights, xv. 11.
^ Hendrik Selle: Dichtung oder Wahrheit – Der Autor der Epiktetischen Predigten. Philologus 145 [2001] 269–290
^ a b c Epictetus, Discourses, prologue.
^ Epictetus, Discourses, i.11; ii.14; iii.4; iii. 7; etc.
^ Historia Augusta, Hadrian, 16.
^ Fox, Robin The Classical World: An Epic History from Homer to Hadrian Basic Books. 2006 pg 578
^ A surviving second or third century Altercatio Hadriani Et Epicteti gives a fictitious account of a conversation between Hadrian and Epictetus.
^ Simplicius, Commentary on the Enchiridion, 46. There is also a joke at Epictetus' expense in Lucian's Life of Demonax about the fact that he had no family.
^ Simplicius, Commentary on the Enchiridion, 46. He may have married her, but Simplicius' language is ambiguous.
^ Lucian, Demoxan, c. 55, torn, ii., ed Hemsterh., p. 393; as quoted in A Selection from the Discourses of Epictetus With the Encheiridion (2009), p. 6
^ He apparently was alive in the reign of Hadrian (117–138). Marcus Aurelius (born 121 A.D.) was an admirer of him, but never met him, and Aulus Gellius (ii.18.10) writing mid-century, speaks of him as if belonging to the recent past.
^ Lucian, Remarks to an illiterate book-lover.
^ Photius, Bibliotheca, states that there were eight books.
^ Epictetus, Discourses, ii.11.1
^ Epictetus, Discourses, i.7.1–8
^ a b Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 201
^ Epictetus, Discourses, iii.2.1–6; Enchiridion, 52
^ Epictetus, Discourses, i.1; Enchiridion, 1
^ Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 204
^ a b Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 206
^ Giovanni Reale, John R. Catan, 1990, A History of Ancient Philosophy: The schools of the Imperial Age, page 80. SUNY Press
^ Christopher Gill, 1995, The Discourses of Epictetus, page xx. Everyman
^ Epictetus, Discourses, i.1.4; i.20
^ Epictetus, Discourses, ii.19.32.
^ Epictetus, Enchiridion, 1
^ Epictetus, Discourses, iii.3.14–19; Enchiridion, 6
^ Epictetus, Discourses, i.2.1
^ Epictetus, Discourses, iii.8; iii.15.1–13; Enchiridion, 29
^ Epictetus, Discourses, ii.18.19–31; iii.3.14–22
^ Epictetus, Enchiridion, 34.
^ Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 207
^ a b Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 208
^ Epictetus, Discourses, i.22.1; ii.11.3
^ Epictetus, Discourses, ii.11.8–13; iii.14.11–14
^ a b Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 209
^ Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 217
^ a b Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 218
^ Epictetus, Discourses, ii.17.22–33
^ Epictetus, Discourses, i.12.16–17
^ Epictetus, Discourses, iii.2.4
^ Epictetus, Discourses, iii.20.4–14
^ Epictetus, Discourses, ii.10.4–5
^ Epictetus, Discourses, i.2.33–37; Enchiridion, 24, 37
^ Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 220
^ Epictetus, Enchiridion, 11, 15
^ Epictetus, Discourses, i.29.29; iii.24.97–101
^ Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 210
^ Epictetus, Discourses, i.18.6–8; i.28.9–10
^ a b Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 211
^ Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 212
^ Stockdale, James Bond. 1993. Courage Under Fire: Testing Epictetus's Doctrines in a Laboratory of Human Behavior. Stanford: Hoover Institution/Stanford University.
^ Marcus Aurelius, i. 7; iv. 41; vii. 19; xi. 33–37
^ George Long, (1890), The Discourses of Epictetus, with the Encheridion and Fragments, page 390. George Bell and Sons
^ Bernard Stiegler, Acting Out (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2009).
^ "True Compassion". EckhartTolleNow.com. Retrieved 4 February 2017. 
^ William O. Stephens, Ph.D
^ The Rebirth of Stoicism Archived December 31, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Laurence Sterne, The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, ed. Ian Campbell Ross (Oxford Univ. Press, 1983), p. 540.
^ (pgs. 202–203 of the Penguin Edition).
^ Matthew Arnold, To A Friend
^ Ageless, Guiltless, by Adam Green.
^ Obituary by Morton Schatzman in The Independent.
^ Obituary by Oliver Burkeman in The Guardian.
Further reading[edit]
Primary sources
Discourses, Fragments, Handbook, Robin Hard (trans.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014. ISBN 978-0199595181
Discourses and Selected Writings, Robert Dobbin (trans.), Oxford: Penguin Classics, 2008 ISBN 978-0-14-044946-4.
The Discourses (The Handbook, Fragments), Robin Hard (trans.), Christopher Gill (contrib.), Everyman Edition, 2003 ISBN 0-460-87312-1.
Epictetus Discourses: Book 1, Robert Dobbin (trans.), (Clarendon Later Ancient Philosophers), Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998 ISBN 0-19-823664-6.
The Handbook, Nicholas P. White (trans.), Indianapolis: Hackett, 1983 ISBN 0-915145-69-3.
Enchiridion, George Long (trans.), New York: A. L. Burt, 1955 (reprint: New York: Dover, 2004) ISBN 0-87975-703-5.
The Discourses, trans. W. A. Oldfather. 2 vols. (Loeb Classical Library edition.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1925 and 1928. ISBN 0-674-99145-1 and ISBN 0-674-99240-7.
Moral Discourses, Enchiridion and Fragments, Elizabeth Carter (trans.), W.H.D. Rouse (Ed.), London: J.M. Dent & Sons, 1910. at Open Library
Studies
Jonathan Barnes, Logic and Imperial Stoa, Leiden: Brill, 1997 (Chapter Three: Epictetuts, pp. 24–127).
Adolf Friedrich Bonhoffer, The Ethics of the Stoic Epictetus, William O. Stephens trans., Bern: Peter Lang, 2000 ISBN 0-8204-5139-8.
Michel Foucault, The Hermeneutics of the Subject: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1981–1982, New York: Picador, 2005 ISBN 0-312-42570-8.
Pedro P. Fuentes González. art. "Épictète", in R. Goulet (ed.), Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques III, Paris, CNRS, 2000, pp. 106–151 ISBN 2-271-05748-5.
Brian E. Johnson, The Role Ethics of Epictetus: Stoicism in Ordinary Life, Lanham: Lexington Books, 2014 ISBN 978-0739179673.
A. A. Long, Epictetus: A Stoic and Socratic Guide to Life, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002 ISBN 0-19-924556-8.
Theodore Scaltsas, Andrew S. Mason (ed.), The Philosophy of Epictetus. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007 ISBN 978-0-1995-8551-9.
Keith Seddon, Epictetus' Handbook and the Tablet of Cebes: Guides to Stoic Living, Routledge, 2005.
Werner Sohn, EPICTETUS: Ein erzkonservativer Bildungsroman mit liberalen Eselsohren (German version) Norderstedt: BoD, 2010 ISBN 978-3-8391-5231-7.
William O. Stephens, Stoic Ethics: Epictetus and Happiness as Freedom, London: Continuum, 2007 ISBN 0-8264-9608-3.
External links[edit]
Find more aboutEpictetusat Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Data from Wikidata
Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Ἐπίκτητος
Epicteti dissertationes ab Arriano digestae, Heinrich Schenkl (ed.), Lipsiae, in aedibus B. G. Teubneri, 1916.
Works by Epictetus at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Epictetus at Internet Archive
Works by Epictetus at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)
Works by Epictetus at the Internet Classics Archive
Graver, Margaret. "Epictetus". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
"Epictetus". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Dialogue between Hadrian and Epictetus – a fictitious 2nd or 3rd century composition, translated into English in The Knickerbocker magazine, August 1857
Commentary on the Enchiridion of Epictetus by Simplicius of Cilicia (6th century)
Stockdale on Stoicism I: The Stoic Warrior's Triad by James Stockdale
Stockdale on Stoicism II: Master of My Fate by James Stockdale
v
t
e
Stoicism
Philosophers
Early
Zeno of Citium
Persaeus
Aristo
Sphaerus
Herillus
Cleanthes
Chrysippus
Zeno of Tarsus
Crates of Mallus
Diogenes of Babylon
Apollodorus
Antipater of Tarsus
Diotimus the Stoic
Middle
Panaetius
Dardanus
Mnesarchus
Hecato
Posidonius
Diodotus
Geminus
Antipater of Tyre
Athenodoros Cananites
Late
Seneca
Cornutus
Musonius Rufus
Euphrates
Cleomedes
Epictetus
Hierocles
Sextus
Junius Rusticus
Marcus Aurelius
Philosophy
Stoicism
categories
passions
physics
Neostoicism
Concepts
Adiaphora
Apatheia
Ataraxia
Ekpyrosis
Eudaimonia
Katalepsis
Kathekon
Logos
Oikeiôsis
Pneuma
Prohairesis
Sophos
Works
De Brevitate Vitae (Seneca)
Discourses (Epictetus)
Enchiridion (Epictetus)
Epistles (Seneca)
Meditations (Marcus Aurelius)
The Republic (Zeno)
Related articles
Paradoxa Stoicorum
Seneca's Consolations
Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta
v
t
e
Ancient Greek schools of philosophy
Pre-Socratic
Schools
Atomism
Eleatics
Ionian
Ephesian
Milesian
Pluralism
Pythagoreanism
Sophism
Philosophers
Anaxagoras
Anaximander
Anaximenes
Democritus
Empedocles
Heraclitus
Leucippus
Melissus
Parmenides
Protagoras
Pythagoras
Thales
Zeno of Elea
Socratic
Schools
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Eretrian school
Megarian school
Peripateticism
Platonism
Philosophers
Antisthenes
Aristippus
Aristotle
Diogenes of Sinope
Euclid of Megara
Phaedo of Elis
Plato
Socrates
Hellenistic
Schools
Epicureanism
Neoplatonism
Neopythagoreanism
Pyrrhonism
Stoicism
Philosophers
Apollonius of Tyana
Epictetus
Epicurus
Lucretius
Plotinus
Pyrrho
Sextus Empiricus
Zeno of Citium
Ancient Greece portal
Philosophy portal
Authority control
WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 100218891
LCCN: n50082929
ISNI: 0000 0001 2125 0744
GND: 118530577
SELIBR: 185286
SUDOC: 026851822
BNF: cb11901803b (data)
MusicBrainz: 15d1db1e-abf4-4d89-a5c3-36e42434880c
NDL: 00539714
NKC: jn19981000989
BNE: XX953221
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Epictetus&oldid=768150880"
Categories: 135 deaths1st-century Greek people1st-century philosophers1st-century Romans2nd-century Greek people2nd-century philosophers2nd-century Romans50 birthsAncient Greek metaphilosophersAncient Greek slaves and freedmenRoman Imperial era slaves and freedmenRoman-era Stoic philosophersRoman-era EpirotesRoman-era PhrygiansHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with hCardsArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2013Articles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersPages using ISBN magic links
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
Article
Talk
Variants
Views
Read
Edit
View history
More
Search
Navigation
Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store
Interaction
HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page
Tools
What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page
Print/export
Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource
Languages
العربيةAzərbaycancaবাংলাБългарскиBosanskiBrezhonegCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어ՀայերենHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתКыргызчаLatinaLietuviųMagyarМакедонскиമലയാളംNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålOccitanPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийScotsShqipSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнська文言Zazaki中文
Edit links
This page was last modified on 2 March 2017, at 02:45.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.
By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Developers
Cookie statement
Mobile view