Claudius Aelianus - Wikipedia
Claudius Aelianus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to:					navigation, 					search
Not to be confused with Aelianus Tacticus.
Claudius Aelianus (Greek: Κλαύδιος Αἰλιανός;[1] c. 175 – c. 235 CE), often seen as just Aelian (/ˈiːliən/), born at Praeneste, was a Roman author and teacher of rhetoric who flourished under Septimius Severus and probably outlived Elagabalus, who died in 222. He spoke Greek so perfectly that he was called "honey-tongued" (meliglossos); Roman-born, he preferred Greek authors, and wrote in a slightly archaizing Greek himself.[2]
His two chief works are valuable for the numerous quotations from the works of earlier authors, which are otherwise lost, and for the surprising lore, which offers unexpected glimpses into the Greco-Roman world-view.
Contents
1 De Natura Animalium
2 Varia Historia
3 Other works
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links
7.1 Aelian on the Characteristics of Animals
7.1.1 Greek with English translation
7.1.2 Latin translation
7.1.3 Greek
De Natura Animalium[edit]
On the Nature of Animals ("On the Characteristics of Animals" is an alternative title; Greek: Περὶ Ζῴων Ἰδιότητος; usually cited, though, by its Latin title: De Natura Animalium) is a curious collection,[2] in seventeen books, of brief stories of natural history, sometimes selected with an eye to conveying allegorical moral lessons, sometimes because they are just so astonishing:
"The Beaver is an amphibious creature: by day it lives hidden in rivers, but at night it roams the land, feeding itself with anything that it can find. Now it understands the reason why hunters come after it with such eagerness and impetuosity, and it puts down its head and with its teeth cuts off its testicles and throws them in their path, as a prudent man who, falling into the hands of robbers, sacrifices all that he is carrying, to save his life, and forfeits his possessions by way of ransom. If however it has already saved its life by self-castration and is again pursued, then it stands up and reveals that it offers no ground for their eager pursuit, and releases the hunters from all further exertions, for they esteem its flesh less. Often however Beavers with testicles intact, after escaping as far away as possible, have drawn in the coveted part, and with great skill and ingenuity tricked their pursuers, pretending that they no longer possessed what they were keeping in concealment."
The Loeb Classical Library introduction characterizes the book as
"an appealing collection of facts and fables about the animal kingdom that invites the reader to ponder contrasts between human and animal behavior."
Aelian's anecdotes on animals rarely depend on direct observation: they are almost entirely taken from written sources, often Pliny the Elder, but also other authors and works now lost, to whom he is thus a valuable witness.[3] He is more attentive to marine life than might be expected,[according to whom?] though, and this seems to reflect first-hand personal interest; he often quotes "fishermen". At times he strikes the modern reader as thoroughly credulous, but at others he specifically states that he is merely reporting what is told by others, and even that he does not believe them. Aelian's work is one of the sources of medieval natural history and of the bestiaries of the Middle Ages.[4]
The portions of the text that are still extant are badly mangled and garbled and replete with later interpolations.[5] Conrad Gessner (or Gesner), the Swiss scientist and natural historian of the Renaissance, made a Latin translation of Aelian's work, to give it a wider European audience. An English translation by A. F. Scholfield has been published in the Loeb Classical Library, 3 vols. (1958-59).
Varia Historia[edit]
Title page of Varia Historia, from the 1668 edition by Tanaquil Faber
Various History (Ποικίλη Ἱστορία) — for the most part preserved only in an abridged form[2] — is Aelian's other well-known work, a miscellany of anecdotes and biographical sketches, lists, pithy maxims, and descriptions of natural wonders and strange local customs, in 14 books, with many surprises for the cultural historian and the mythographer, anecdotes about the famous Greek philosophers, poets, historians, and playwrights and myths instructively retold. The emphasis is on various moralizing tales about heroes and rulers, athletes and wise men; reports about food and drink, different styles in dress or lovers, local habits in giving gifts or entertainments, or in religious beliefs and death customs; and comments on Greek painting. Aelian gives an account of fly fishing, using lures of red wool and feathers, of lacquerwork, serpent worship — Essentially the Various History is a Classical "magazine" in the original senses of that word. He is not perfectly trustworthy in details, and his agenda was heavily influenced by Stoic opinions,[6] perhaps so that his readers will not feel guilty, but Jane Ellen Harrison found survivals of archaic rites mentioned by Aelian very illuminating in her Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion (1903, 1922).
The first printing was in 1545. The standard modern text is Mervin R. Dilts's, of 1974.
Two English translations of the Various History, by Fleming (1576) and Stanley (1665) made Aelian's miscellany available to English readers, but after 1665 no English translation appeared, until three English translations appeared almost simultaneously: James G. DeVoto, Claudius Aelianus: Ποιϰίλης Ἱοτορίας ("Varia Historia") Chicago, 1995; Diane Ostrom Johnson, An English Translation of Claudius Aelianus' "Varia Historia", 1997; and N. G. Wilson, Aelian: Historical Miscellany in the Loeb Classical Library.
Other works[edit]
Considerable fragments of two other works, On Providence and Divine Manifestations, are preserved in the early medieval encyclopedia, the Suda. Twenty "letters from a farmer" after the manner of Alciphron are also attributed to him.[2] The letters are invented compositions to a fictitious correspondent, which are a device for vignettes of agricultural and rural life, set in Attica, though mellifluous Aelian once boasted that he had never been outside Italy, never been aboard a ship (which is at variance, though, with his own statement, de Natura Animalium XI.40, that he had seen the bull Serapis with his own eyes). Thus conclusions about actual agriculture in the Letters are as likely to evoke Latium as Attica. The fragments have been edited in 1998 by D. Domingo-Foraste, but are not available in English. The Letters are available in the Loeb Classical Library, translated by Allen Rogers Benner and Francis H. Fobes (1949).
See also[edit]
Historiae animalium by Gessner
References[edit]
^ Η φυσιογνωμία ενός λαού θεμελιών. Μύθοι για την Ελιά. Retrieved June 5, 2011, from http://www.etwinning.gr/projects/elia/muthoi.htm
^ a b c d  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Aelian". Encyclopædia Britannica. 1 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 256.  This cites:
Editio princeps of complete works by Gesner, 1556; Hercher, 1864-1866.
English translation of the Various History only by Fleming, 1576, and Stanley, 1665
Translation of the Letters by Quillard (French), 1895
^ The third volume of the Loeb Classical Library translation gives a gazetteer of authors cited by Aelian.
^ Cohen, Simona (2008). Animals as Disguised Symbols in Renaissance Art. Brill. pp. 38–39. ISBN 90-04-17101-0. 
^ "Aelian's text, riddled as it is with corrupt passages and packed with interpretations,provides ample scope for reckless emendation", D. E. Eichholz observed, reviewing Sholfield's Loeb Library translation in The Classical Review 1960:219, and praising the translator for restraint in this direction.
^ Zeyl, Donald (2013). Encyclopedia of Classical Philosophy. Routledge. ISBN 9781134270781. Retrieved 30 November 2013. 
Further reading[edit]
Aelian, On Animals. 3 volumes. Translated by A. F. Scholfield. 1958-9. Loeb Classical Library. ISBN 978-0-674-99491-1, ISBN 978-0-674-99493-5, and ISBN 978-0-674-99494-2
Aelian, Historical Miscellany. Translated by Nigel G. Wilson. 1997. Loeb Classical Library. ISBN 978-0-674-99535-2
Alciphron, Aelian, and Philostratus, The Letters. Translated by A. R. Benner, F. H. Fobes. 1949. Loeb Classical Library. ISBN 978-0-674-99421-8
Aelian, On the Nature of Animals. Translated by Gregory McNamee. 2011. Trinity University Press. ISBN 978-1-59534-075-7
External links[edit]
Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Claudius Aelianus
Works by or about Claudius Aelianus at Internet Archive
Works by Claudius Aelianus at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)
Ποικίλη ἱστορία – bibliotheca Augustana
Raw Greek OCR of Hercher's 1864 Teubner edition of Aelian's works at the Lace repository of Mount Allison University: vol. I, vol. 2
Various History at James Eason's site (excerpts in English translation)
Some quotes from Aelian's natural history (English)
Aelian from the fly-fisherman's point-of-view
The Evidence for Aelian's Katêgoria tou gunnidos regarding Aelian's presumed invective against Elagabalus
Aelian on the Characteristics of Animals[edit]
Greek with English translation[edit]
Aelian on the Characteristics of Animals, Books I-V (Greek with English translation by A.F. Scholfield, 1950)
Aelian on the Characteristics of Animals, Books VI-XI (Greek with English translation by A.F. Scholfield, 1950)
Aelian on the Characteristics of Animals, Books XII-XVII (Greek with English translation by A.F. Scholfield, 1950)
Latin translation[edit]
De natura animalium at LacusCurtius (complete Latin translation)
Greek[edit]
De natura animalium libri XVII, Varia historia, Epistolae fragmenta, ex recognitione Rudolphi Hercheri, Lipsiae, in aedibus B. G. Teubneri, 1864: vol. 1, vol. 2.
v
t
e
Natural history
Pioneering
naturalists
Classical antiquity
Aristotle (History of Animals)
Theophrastus (Historia Plantarum)
Aelian (De Natura Animalium)
Pliny the Elder (Natural History)
Dioscorides (De Materia Medica)
The Renaissance
Gaspard Bauhin (Pinax theatri botanici)
Otto Brunfels
Hieronymus Bock
Andrea Cesalpino
Valerius Cordus
Leonhart Fuchs
Conrad Gessner (Historia animalium)
Frederik Ruysch
William Turner (Avium Praecipuarum, New Herball)
John Gerard (Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes)
The Enlightenment
Robert Hooke (Micrographia)
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
William Derham
Hans Sloane
Carl Linnaeus (Systema Naturae)
Georg Steller
Joseph Banks
Johan Christian Fabricius
James Hutton
John Ray (Historia Plantarum)
Comte de Buffon (Histoire Naturelle)
Bernard Germain de Lacépède
Gilbert White (The Natural History of Selborne)
Thomas Bewick (A History of British Birds)
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (Philosophie Zoologique)
19th century
George Montagu (Ornithological Dictionary)
Georges Cuvier (Le Règne Animal)
William Smith
Charles Darwin (On the Origin of Species)
Alfred Russel Wallace (The Malay Archipelago)
Henry Walter Bates (The Naturalist on the River Amazons)
Alexander von Humboldt
John James Audubon (The Birds of America)
William Buckland
Charles Lyell
Mary Anning
Jean-Henri Fabre
Louis Agassiz
Philip Henry Gosse
Asa Gray
William Jackson Hooker
Joseph Dalton Hooker
William Jardine (The Naturalist's Library)
Ernst Haeckel (Kunstformen der Natur)
Richard Lydekker (The Royal Natural History)
20th century
Abbott Thayer (Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom)
Hugh B. Cott (Adaptive Coloration in Animals)
Niko Tinbergen (The Study of Instinct)
Konrad Lorenz (On Aggression)
Karl von Frisch (The Dancing Bees)
Ronald Lockley (Shearwaters)
Topics
Natural history museums (List)
Parson-naturalists (List)
Natural History Societies
List of natural history dealers
Authority control
WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 100219416
LCCN: n82032651
ISNI: 0000 0000 7980 209X
GND: 119160285
SELIBR: 175772
SUDOC: 030060087
BNF: cb13092007b (data)
NLA: 35816447
NDL: 00462084
BNE: XX963905
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Claudius_Aelianus&oldid=756010080"
Categories: 175 births235 deathsPeople from PalestrinaClaudiiAncient Roman rhetoriciansAncient Greek writers3rd-century Romans3rd-century writersHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2016Articles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersPages using ISBN magic links
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
Article
Talk
Variants
Views
Read
Edit
View history
More
Search
Navigation
Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store
Interaction
HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page
Tools
What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page
Print/export
Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikisource
Languages
বাংলাБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתLatinaNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнська中文
Edit links
This page was last modified on 21 December 2016, at 13:13.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.
By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Developers
Cookie statement
Mobile view